**Chapter 3**

## 3 Stochastic Diffusion Search (SDS)

**Algorithm 3** SDSas introduced by Bishop (1989)

```
INITIALISE (mappings);
REPEAT
TEST (mappings);
DIFFUSE (mappings);
UNTIL TERMINATION;
```
### 3.1 Introduction toSDS

First described in 1989 by J.M. Bishop, Stochastic Diffusion Search (SDS) was introduced
as an evolution of the study of Hinton mapping [7] (Section 2.2.3.6, p.50). Where Hinton
mapping identifies objects by testing for all possible combinations of stimuli, SDS stochastically tests certain hypotheses against partial combinations of stimuli, and subsequently
performs a diffusion process where more promising hypotheses are more likely to be tested
against further features. At the time, and at least as late as 1998 [67], the term “Stochastic
Search Networks” was used, but SDS will be used throughout.

SDS has a number of important features, including; robustness in the presence of noise; a
simplicity that lends itself well to mathematical modelling; and stable global state emerging
from the stochastic behaviour of individuals. Its robustness make SDS particularly suited
to real world tasks which may be noisy, and may change over time. The relative ease of
modelling SDS mathematically has lead to the ability to predict a number of aspects of its
behaviour. The stability of SDS means it may also be an important model for methods of
guiding intelligent behaviour without a central executive control.

The operation of SDS is most intuitively explained by analogy, a number of which have been
used, most commonlyThe Restaurant Game[15], and more recentlyThe Mining Game[86].
These are described below, followed by the pseudocode of a single iteration ofSDS.

#### 3.1.1 The Restaurant Game

The Restaurant Game, reproduced here from 2003 [15], describes how a group of people may
employ SDS to perform a search for the best restaurant in an unfamiliar town.

> A group of delegates attends a long conference in an unfamiliar town. Each
> night they have to find somewhere to dine. There is a large choice of restaurants,
> each of which offers a large variety of meals. The problem the group faces is to
> find the best restaurant, that is the restaurant where the maximum number of
> delegates would enjoy dining. Even a parallel exhaustive search through the
> restaurant and meal combinations would take too long to accomplish. To solve
> the problem delegates decide to employ a Stochastic Diffusion Search.
> Each delegate acts as an agent maintaining a hypothesis identifying the best
> restaurant in town. Each night each delegate tests his hypothesis by dining
> there and randomly selecting one of the meals on offer. The next morning
> at breakfast every delegate who did not enjoy his meal the previous night,
> asks one randomly selected colleague to share his dinner impressions. If the
> experience was good, he also adopts this restaurant as his choice. Otherwise he
> simply selects another restaurant at random from those listed in ‘Yellow Pages’.
> Using this strategy it is found that very rapidly [a] significant number of dele-
> gates congregate around the best restaurant in town.

The process of the restaurant game has a number of notable features. Within minimal
centralised control the group of delegates acts together to solve a problem that could not
be quickly solved by an individual. The delegates will efficiently move to the next best

restaurant if the current one has a significant drop in standards or closes down entirely.
The restaurants, the menus, or the individual meals need to be directly comparable, all
that is required is for each agent to decide for themself whether their experience was
good. Delegates will find themselves enjoying many evenings in a relatively high quality
restaurant long before all of the meals in all of the restaurants in town could have been
evaluated.

This analogy has been criticised on the grounds that delegates are likely to have differing
dining preferences and hence it is possible for a delegate to locate a restaurant in which
they enjoy all of the meals on offer, but which is unsatisfying to all other delegates. In the
case where only one delegate, or a small proportion of the group, remains permanently at
such a restaurant the rest of the group will proceed largely as usual and so the majority will
still converge on the best restaurant. Taken to the extreme, however, all agents may find
themselves dining alone, even when there exists a single superior restaurant which would
satisfy the largest portion of the delegates. This superior restaurant would never be located
as all delegates are satisfied with the meals at their current restaurant, and hence never
select a new restaurant. This critique led to the development ofThe Mining Game, which
depends on the less subjective notion of locating gold rather than dining preferences.

#### 3.1.2 The Mining Game

Originally defined in 2010 [85] the Mining Game uses an analogy of searching a landscape
for the best mining prospect. A slightly improved version from 2013 [84] is quoted below.

> A group of friends (miners) learn that there is gold to be found on the hills of a
> mountain range but have no information regarding its distribution. On their
> maps the mountain range is divided into a set of discrete hills and each hill
> contains a discrete set of seams to mine. Over time, on any day the probability
> of finding gold at a seam is proportional to its net wealth.
> To maximise their collective wealth, the miners need to identify the hill with
> the richest seams of gold so that the maximum number of miners can dig there
> (this information is not available a-priori). In order to solve this problem, the
> miners decide to employ a simple Stochastic Diffusion Search.
> - At the start of the mining process each miner is randomly allocated a hill to mine (his hill hypothesis,h).
> - Every day each miner is allocated a randomly selected seam on his hill to mine.
> - At the end of each day, the probability that a miner is happy^1 is proportional to the amount of gold he has found.
> - At the end of the day the miners congregate and over the evening each
>     miner who is unhappy selects another miner at random to talk to. If the
>     chosen miner is happy, he happily tells his colleague the identity of the hill
>     he is mining (that is, he communicates his hill hypothesis,h, which thus
>     both now maintain). Conversely, if the chosen miner is unhappy he says
>     nothing and the original miner is once more reduced to selecting a new
>     hypothesis — identifying the hill he is to mine the next day — at random.
> 
> In the context of SDS, agents take the role of miners; active agents being ‘happy
> miners’, inactive agents being ‘unhappy miners’ and the agent’s hypothesis
> being the miner’s ‘hill-hypothesis’. It can be shown that this process is
> isomorphic toSDS, and thus that the miners will naturally self-organise and
> rapidly congregate over hill(s) on the mountain range with a high
> concentration of gold.

The happiness of the miners can be measured probabilistically, or represented with an
absolute boolean value, so long as each miner is either happy or unhappy by the end of
each day [82]. Furthermore, if the gold is modelled as a finite resource, reducing over time,
then the search is sufficiently adaptive that miners change where they congregate as the
location with the most gold changes.

#### 3.1.3 Pseudocode

```
In this example, agents have access to a function for randomly selecting a hypothesis for
the set of all possible hypotheses, and for randomly selecting a microtest from a given
set. Each microtest evaluates a specific part of a hypothesis and returns a boolean value
indicating whether or not the test passed.
```
(^1) Though ‘happy’ is a term that is similarly subjective as one’s dining preferences, in this case it is used in
an objective sense. All miners share an identical process whereby the amount of gold they locate on a single


**Algorithm 4** A single iteration of standardSDS
1: **for each** agent **in** swarm **do** .Diffusion phase
2: **if** agent is inactive **then**
3: polled←randomly selected agent in swarm
4: **if** polled is active **then**
5: agent assumes the hypothesis of polled
6: **else**
7: agent randomly selects a new hypothesis
8: **for each** agent **in** swarm **do** .Test phase
9: microtest←randomly selected microtest
10: agent performs the microtest against their hypothesis .Partial evaluation
11: **if** the microtest passes **then**
12: agent becomes active
13: **else**
14: agent becomes inactive

To recap definitions. Anagentis an individual member of a swarm. Aswarmis a collection
of agents. Asearch spaceis the set of all possible hypotheses. Ahypothesisis an element
of the search space, or an index referring to an element of the search space. Amicrotest
is a function which partially evaluates a hypothesis. Thescoreof a hypothesis is equal to
the probability of an agent with that hypothesis being active after the test phase. A full
glossary is available in Chapter 6, p.174.
SDSlends itself well to mathematical analysis. In the next section a simple but powerful
model of the convergence behaviour of SDS is described. The features of SDS which have
previously been modelled and the insights into its behaviour using this model are then
described. Following this a formalism for describing variants of SDS is developed and some
of the advantages and disadvantages of all the main variants which have been published
are identified.

```
day defines a probability that the miner will declare themselves ‘happy’ at the end of the day when miners
congregate to potentially share the identity of the hills they are mining.
```

### 3.2 Mathematical analysis ofSDS

To appreciate the mathematical analysis of SDS which has been published it is required that
first the model is described.

This analysis will always assume the search space contains exactly one hypothesis with a
score larger than any other hypothesis, called the optimal hypothesis, and many hypotheses
with a significantly lower score, the collective effect of which can be described by a single
value [63, p.118] known collectively as homogeneous background noise. Furthermore the
search space size, the number of hypotheses in a search space, is represented by the symbol
S. The swarm size, the number of agents in a swarm, is represented by the symbolA. The
proportion of the swarm which are active at a given time, is known as the global activity.

#### 3.2.1 Discrete Dynamical Systems model

```
Introduced in [60] and explored in [62], the Discrete Dynamical System Model (DDSM) of
SDShas been used to clearly express results previously reached via other methods as well
as new models of the behaviour ofSDS. Similar to previous models, an assumption is made
of homogeneous background noise. The DDSM introduces the following notation.
```
```
α the score of the optimal hypothesis
β the mean probability of an agent at any non-optimal hypothesis becoming active
c ̄i the mean number of active agents maintaining the optimal hypothesis as a proportion
of the total population
```
```
From these definitions, α and β is holds that 0 ≤ β < α ≤1, and the following expressions
can be immediately derived; as represented in Figure 3.1.
c ̄i
α Proportion of active and inactive agents at the optimal hypothesis
1 − α
α c ̄i Proportion of inactive agents at the optimal hypothesis
1 −c ̄ α i Proportion of active and inactive agents at any noise hypothesis
β
```
###### (

```
1 −c α ̄i
```
###### )

```
Proportion of active agents at any noise hypothesis
```

#### AGENTS

#### ACTIVE

#### Optimal Solution

#### AGENTS

#### INACTIVE

#### Optimal Solution

#### AGENTS

#### ACTIVE

#### Noise Solution

#### AGENTS

#### INACTIVE

#### Noise Solution

#### c ̄i

#### α

#### Optimal Solution

1 − c _α_ ̄i

#### Background Noise

```
c ̄i^1 − α
α c ̄i β
```
```
[
1 − c α ̄i
```
```
]
[^1 − β ]
```
```
[
1 − c α ̄i
```
]

```
Figure 3.1: Myatt’s discrete dynamical systems model ofSDS.
```
```
( 1 − β )( 1 −c ̄i
α
```
###### )

```
Proportion of inactive agents at any noise hypothesis
```
The properties of SDS which have been modelled can be split into three categories: the
convergence criteria, which describe the set of parameters over which SDS can be expected
to converge; the convergence time, which measures the mean number of iterations before a
cluster forms at the optimal hypothesis; and the steady state, which describes the number
of agents at the optimal hypothesis after convergence.

#### 3.2.2 Minimum convergence criteria

```
Using a Markov Chain model it was shown that for a stable cluster to form it must hold
that
2 α ( 1 −p α )< 1 (3.1)
```
wherep _α_ is the probability of selecting the optimal hypothesis at random [63, p.72]. As the
search space is often large,p _α_ can be assumed to be small, in which case one obtains

```
α ≥^12 (3.2)
```
A similar result was shown using a probabilistic model [31], the minimum value of optimal
hypothesis score at which a stable cluster will form in the presence of homogeneous
background noise was shown to be

```
α min= 2 −^1 β (3.3)
```

This result was confirmed using the DDSM. The mean number of inactive agents adopting
the optimal hypothesis during the diffusion phase is described by the functiong( _α_ , _β_ ,c ̄i)c ̄i
which yields the number of inactive agents for a given iteration. From Figure 3.1gcan be
written as
g( _α_ , _β_ ,c ̄i) =^1 − _αα_ c ̄i+ ( 1 − _β_ )( 1 −c ̄ _α_ i) (3.4)

Therefore, the functionfwhich defines the one-step evolution function is

```
c ̄i+ 1 =f( α , β ,c ̄i)
= α (c ̄i+g(c ̄i, α , β )c ̄i)
=c ̄i( β c ̄i+ 2 α − α c ̄i− αβ )
```
###### (3.5)

```
For SDS to converge the repeated iteration of f must stabilise at a non-zero value. It
therefore must hold thatd fdc ̄i >1 whenc ̄i=0. Differentiatingfbyc ̄iand solving for α
```
whendd fc ̄i>1 yields _α_ min.

```
α min= 2 −^1 β (3.6)
```
It has been shown experimentally that an SDS with a value of _α_ such that _α_ = _α_ min+0.01
would reliably converge, and if _α_ = _α_ min−0.01there would be no stable clusters [60].
Hence, the experimental value of _α_ minwas shown to be within±0.01of the theoretical,
validating the theory.

An advantage of the homogeneous background noise model is that an estimate of _β_ can be
achieved by taking the mean value of activity over repetitions of the test phase. This value
can be substituted into equation 3.6 to provide a lower bound for convergence.

##### 3.2.2.1 Robustness

By taking all combinations of values of _α_ and _β_ , the minimum convergence criteria can
be used to identify each combination as falling into one of three categories; they are (i)
invalid search spaces, where _β_ ≥ _α_ , ii) search spaces that successfully converge as _α_ > _α_ min
and iii) search spaces that do not converge [62]. The proportion of valid search spaces for
which standard SDS will successfully converge is named the robustness ( _ζ_ ) and has been


```
calculated to be approximately 0.614 [62, p.54].
```
```
ζ = 2 ( 1 −ln 2)≈0.614 (3.7)
```
#### 3.2.3 Convergence time

The convergence of SDS can be described in three phases. In the first phase few agents are
active and many new hypotheses are generated at random each iteration, the number of
iterations spent in this phase is described by the time to first hit (Section 3.2.3.1). In the
second phase a cluster forms once an agent has assumed an appropriate hypothesis, this
phase is relatively short as it is dominated by the positive feedback effect of the diffusion
(Section 3.2.3.2). In the third phase, after a stable cluster has formed many agents are active
and few new hypotheses are selected, this phase can be practically indefinite, owing to the
very high probability of a cluster persisting (Section 3.2.3.3). A Markov Chain model was
used to show that the convergence time increases dramatically when there was a small
relative discrimination between _α_ and _β_ [64].

##### 3.2.3.1 Time to first hit (TH)

The time to first hit (TH) describes the number of iterations after which the probability
that the optimal hypothesis has been located reaches a given probabilityp. In cases where
_β_ =0 the time to first hit has been shown to be [6, 67]

```
TH=Alnln(^1 (−S−p 1 )
S )
```
###### (3.8)

```
In cases where β >0, the time to first hit will be larger as some agents will be maintain-
ing suboptimal hypotheses and hence will not generate new random hypotheses in the
diffusion phase the time to first hit has therefore been shown to be calculated as [61]
```
###### TH=S

```
ln^1 p
A( 1 − β )^2 (3.9)
```
which is linear with respect toS[61, 6].


##### 3.2.3.2 Positive feedback effect of cluster formation

Once an agent has assumed the optimal hypothesis a process of positive feedback occurs.
This occurs because the most important factor in the probability of an agent assuming
the optimal hypothesis is the number of agents currently maintaining that hypothesis.
As the number of agents maintaining the optimal hypothesis increases, the rate at which
new agents assume that hypothesis also increases, so long as there are sufficient inactive
agents remaining. This very quickly reaches a steady state in which the number of agents
which were maintaining the optimal hypothesis becoming inactive equals the number of
agents assuming the optimal hypothesis in the diffusion phase [66]. This phase lasts for a
relatively small number of iterations when compared to the time to first hit which is a linear
with respect to search space size and the steady state which will be seen to be practically
indefinite.

##### 3.2.3.3 Stability of convergence

The stability of convergence may describe the mean number of iterations for which a cluster
can be expected to persist once it has formed as well as the property of SDS where clusters
are able to form at the optimal hypothesis in the presence of other hypotheses that have
similar scores.

**Strong convergence criterion** It has been proved mathematically that in cases where
_β_ =0, _α_ =1 and at least one agent is maintaining the optimal hypothesis, that the
probability of all agents maintaining that hypothesis approaches 1 [8][63, p.56][62, p.63].
These conditions taken as together define the strong convergence criterion.

In cases where _α_ <1,SDSwill not strongly converge and may weakly converge [64].
Weakly converging mean that SDS is only ever statistically stable, there is always a non-zero
probability that the swarm will transition into any state from any other state. This means
any apparently stable cluster may collapse at any iteration, though it is likely to exist
long enough to be detected. An advantage of this behaviour is that an apparently stable
cluster will collapse once a superior hypothesis has been located, hence SDS can be applied
successfully to problem spaces that change over time.


The stability of the converged state of SDS was derived using a Markov Chain model [65].
Using some selected valuesA=1000,p _α_ =0.001, _α_ =0.8, _β_ =0 the mean number of
iterations before a stable cluster will collapse (m 0 ) was calculated to be

```
m 0 ≈(0.25^1 ) 1000 ∝ 10602
```
```
thus this state is visited very rarely and as such the search is very stable. Even whenA= 10
m 0 ∝ 106.
```
As the stability of the search depends exponentially on the number of agents in the swarm,
the ratio of logarithms of mean return times to the ‘all-inactive’ state for a pair of instances
of SDS is equal to the ratio of the numbers of agents involved in the search. Hence, the
number of agents in a swarm may efficiently control the stability of solutions in practical
applications [65].
It has been stated that the rate of convergence is geometric “for some constant” [64]. The
DDSM has been used to show the constant to be

```
α ( 2 − β ) (3.10)
```
```
as such, it can be observed that an increase in α will reduce convergence time more than
decreasing β by the same amount [62].
```
#### 3.2.4 Sensitivity of convergence

A distractor hypothesis is a single hypothesis with a score ( _δ_ ) such that _β_ < _δ_ < _α_. Using
an Ehrenfest urn model of SDS it has been shown that even in the presence of a strong
distractor hypothesis that there is a significant increase in the order of magnitude of
the probability of an agent maintaining the optimal hypothesis against that of an agent
maintaining the distractor hypothesis [p.101][63]. In a three-dimensional plot of the optimal
hypothesis score ( _α_ ) and the distractor hypothesis score ( _δ_ ) against the probability of an
agent maintaining the optimal hypothesis three distinct surfaces of equal probability were
visible. One surface represented the case when _δ_ was larger than _α_ and so can be ignored by
definition ( _α_ > _δ_ ). The second surface occurred at _δ_ <0.5and _α_ <0.5which represented
that an agent was equally likely to maintain either hypothesis when both hypotheses have


a score that is too small to form a cluster. The third surface occurred when _α_ >max( _δ_ , 0.5)
which represented when optimal hypothesis had a score which could form a cluster.

An important feature of these surfaces was the steep transition between them, this repre-
sented that SDS was very sensitive to differences between _α_ and _δ_ and so an agent would
most likely be found at the optimal hypothesis even when _δ_ was within 1% of _α_. Another
important feature of these surfaces was their flatness which described that the probability
of convergence was not affected by the presence of the distractor hypothesis, only the
ability of the optimal hypothesis to form a cluster. This means that SDS is particularly
insensitive to signal to noise ratio, in cases where the signal (the optimal hypothesis), is
strong enough.

#### 3.2.5 Steady state resource allocation

```
In the case where β = 0 and α <1, a model of the cluster size mean and standard
deviation [66]. The mean number of active agents (E[n]) is
```
```
E[n] =A π 1 (3.11)
```
```
and the standard deviation is
σ =√A π 1 π 2 (3.12)
```
where
_π_ 1 = _π_^3 −^1 +

```
√[ π
3 −^1 ]^2 +^2 π 3 (^1 − β )p α
π 3 (3.13)
```
```
π 2 =^1 −
```
```
√[ π
3 −^1 ]^2 +^2 π 3 (^1 − β )p α
π 3 (3.14)
```
```
π 3 = 2 α ( 1 −p α ) (3.15)
```
```
It has also been shown that the attractors are never strange attractors for valid values of α
and β. This proves that the convergence behaviour is not chaotic and hence the level of
activity in SDS will always tend towards a constant level [62].
```

```
For cases where α > α minthe mean stationary state will be [62]
```
```
γ = α (^2 α −− β ) β −^1 (3.16)
```
##### 3.2.5.1 Estimating optimal hypothesis score from steady state

The value for _α_ can be estimated by dividing the number of active agents at the largest
cluster by the sum of active and inactive agents at the largest cluster [62].

```
̂ α =cactivecactive+cinactive (3.17)
```
This is notable as this expression does not depend on the level of homogeneous background
noise.
It is also observed that the same estimate can be achieved using the global activity, and
not just the activity at the largest cluster. Given the stationary state for the optimal cluster
(Equation 3.16) and Figure 3.1, the stationary state for all active agents must be equal to

```
γ ′= γ + β
```
###### [

```
1 − γα
```
###### ]

```
= 2 −^1 α
```
###### (3.18)

```
thus α can be estimated by
̂ α = 2 −^1 ̂ γ (3.19)
```

### 3.3 A formal specification forSDS

Given the initial description ofSDS(Algorithm 3, p.66) each line may be considered as
indicating potential for variation. Some of these dimensions of variation are relevant only
to the specific implementation and do not pertain to the variant themselves. All remaining
dimensions are described and their major characteristics identified. As SDS can be modified
in a practically unlimited number of ways a strict definition of what is and is not a variant
cannot be given, instead a specification which succinctly describes the majority of the
published variants is presented. Where any variant has been mathematically analysed, it is
presented here.

#### 3.3.1 Areas of potential variation inSDS

In the original description (Algorithm 3, p.66)SDSis defined in five lines. Using these five
lines and following the framework defined in [16], the main areas of variation of SDS can be
identified. The first of these areas isinitialisationwhich is concerned with variations in the
initial hypotheses and activities of agents in the swarm. Second, the textREPEATindicates
variations in theiterationof the test phase and diffusion phase. Third, there are variations
in thetest phase, where hypotheses are partially evaluated. Fourth, there are variations in
thediffusion phase, where new hypotheses are selected and potentially distributed amongst
the swarm. Fifth, there are variations in thetermination, orhaltingconditions, in which
the aim is to halt the procedure once SDS has converged to a solution. Finally, one more
area of variation has been identified which is the method ofextraction, where a solution is
indicated by the formation of clusters [16, p. 117]. In order to systematically distinguish
and compare the most significant variations of SDS a formalism is developed. A variant of
SDSwill be defined as a combination of its modes of iteration, diffusion, test and halting.

#### 3.3.2 Formalism

An instance of SDS can be described as a combination of its mode of iteration (I) and
halting (H). Before each iteration the halting function is evaluated and the process continues
to perform iterations until the halting function evaluates astrue.Idefines the mode of
iteration, each evaluation of theIfunction will count as one iteration.


**Algorithm 5** SDSas formalised
1: **function** SDS(I,H)
2: **function** SDS’( )
3: **while not** H() **do**
4: I()
5: **return** SDS’

**Mode of iteration —** I The mode of iteration in the original description of SDS is known
as synchronous operation. A single iteration is defined as having passed once all agents
perform the diffusion phase followed by all agents performing the test phase. This mode
of iteration, namedISYNCHRONOUScan be seen in 6. The definition of the mode of iteration
therefore requires the parametersDto define the mode of diffusion,Tto define the mode
of testing, and a reference to the swarm. The returned function has no arguments and each
call effects a single iteration on the swarm. Algorithm 6 shows synchronous iteration which
defines the mode of iteration of standardSDS, for the reasons explained in section 3.3.4.1,
the diffusion phase is performed before the test phase.

**Algorithm 6** ISYNCHRONOUS— Synchronous iteration
1: **function** ISYNCHRONOUS(D,T, swarm)
2: **function** I’( )
3: **for each** agent **in** swarm **do**
4: D(agent) .Diffusion phase
5: **for each** agent **in** swarm **do**
6: T(agent) .Test phase
7: **return** I’

```
Mode of diffusion — D The mode of diffusion is the mechanism by which agents share
hypotheses or select new hypotheses, each search space therefore requires a unique method
by which hypotheses are selected. The definition of the mode of diffusion therefore requires
the parameterDHwhich defines a function for selecting new hypotheses, and a reference
to the swarm. The returned function takes an agent as an argument and each call effects
the mode of diffusion on that agent. Algorithm 7 shows passive diffusion which relies on
the inactive agents requesting hypotheses from active agents and is the mode of diffusion
of standardSDS.
```
**Mode of hypothesis selection —** DH The hypothesis selecting function is the method by
which agents select new hypotheses. The definition ofDHtherefore requires the parameter
hypotheseswhich represents the set of all the possible hypotheses. When implementing this


**Algorithm 7** DPASSIVE— Passive diffusion
1: **function** DPASSIVE(DH, swarm)
2: **function** D’(agent)
3: **if** agent is inactive **then**
4: polled←random agent in swarm
5: **if** polled is active **then**
6: hypothesis of agent←hypothesis of polled
7: **else**
8: hypothesis of agent←DH()
9: **return** D’

```
function the set of all possible hypotheses may be fully enumerated, or selected as required
by an underlying function. Where full enumeration is likely to require less computational
resources it will likely require more memory and conversely selecting hypotheses from a
function will likely require more computational resources but less memory. The returned
function takes no arguments and each call returns a randomly selected hypothesis.
```
As originally introduced [6], the standard method for selecting hypotheses is to uniformly
randomly distribute new hypotheses over the search space. This does not require any
specific a priori knowledge of the task, and will evenly distribute the resources through the
search space. This technique does not modify its behaviour as a result of previous activity
and so has the advantage of never being trapped indefinitely in locally optimal areas of the
search space, but has the disadvantage of not responding to potentially helpful information.
Algorithm 8 shows uniformly random hypothesis selection.

**Algorithm 8** DHUNIFORM— Uniformly random hypothesis selection
1: **function** DHUNIFORM(hypotheses)
2: **function** DH’( )
3: hypothesis←element selected uniformly at random from hypotheses
4: **return** hypothesis
5: **return** DH’

**Mode of testing —** T The mode of testing for each agent involves selecting a microtest,
using that microtest to perform a partial evaluation of their hypothesis and updating
their activity correspondingly. The definition of the mode of testing therefore requires the
parameterT Mwhich defines a function for selecting a microtest. The returned function
takes an agent as an argument and each call effects the mode of testing on that agent.
Algorithm 9 shows boolean testing which defines the mode of testing of standardSDS, it is
important to note that while the mechanism of boolean testing is simple, it requires that
a method of evaluating a hypothesis be defined as a set of boolean functions. This is a


```
significant requirement as the solutions to many search tasks cannot be evaluated with a
set of boolean functions, or the functions themselves may include the use of predetermined
thresholds.
```
**Algorithm 9** TBOOLEAN— Boolean testing
1: **function** TBOOLEAN(T M)
2: **function** T’(agent)
3: microtest←T M()
4: partial evaluation←microtest(hypothesis of agent) .partial evaluation∈ **B**
5: **if** partial evaluation =true **then**
6: agent becomes active
7: **else**
8: agent becomes inactive
9: **return** T’

**Microtest selection —** T M The microtest selecting function is the method by which
agents select how they will partially evaluate their hypothesis. The definition ofT Mthere-
fore requires the parametermicrotestswhich represents the set of all possible microtests.
As with thehypothesesparameter toDHthe set of microtests may be fully enumerated or
selected as required, however the number of microtests is often to be small compared to
other features of a search space and so full enumeration is more common. The returned
function takes no arguments and each call returns a randomly selected microtest. Algo-
rithm 10 shows uniformly random microtest selection which defines the microtest selection
of standardSDS.
**Algorithm 10** T MUNIFORM— Uniform microtest selection
1: **function** T MUNIFORM(microtests)
2: **function** T M’( )
3: microtest←element selected uniformly at random from microtests
4: **return** microtest
5: **return** T M’

```
Mode of halting — H The halting function is the method by which an instance ofSDS
determines whether or not to continue to callIand hence perform further iterations. A
halting function can therefore be defined as a function which takes no parameters and
returns a boolean value.
```
```
H=f:()→ B (3.20)
```

There are many different halting functions, a very simple example is to halt after a prede-
termined number of iterations. This method, called fixed iterations halting, requires the
parametermaximum iterationsto define the maximum number of iterations that will elapse.
The returned function takes no arguments and will returnfalseuntil it has been called a
number of times greater thanmaximum iterations. Other halting functions perform more
complicated operations over the current and previous states of the swarm and so require a
more complicated set of parameters. Algorithm 11 shows fixed iterations halting.

**Algorithm 11** HFIXED— Fixed iteration count halting
1: **function** HFIXED(maximum iterations)
2: iteration count← 0
3: **function** H’( )
4: iteration count←iteration count + 1
5: halt←iteration count > maximum iterations .halt∈ **B**
6: **return** halt
7: **return** H’

#### 3.3.3 StandardSDS(SSDS)

```
StandardSDScan be therefore denoted as in equation 3.21.
```
```
SDSSTANDARD=SDS
```
###### (

###### ISYNCHRONOUS(DPASSIVE(DHUNIFORM),TBOOLEAN(T MUNIFORM)),HFIXED

###### )

###### (3.21)

To simplify the description of further variants, all the features of standardSDSwill be
denoted as standard forms as this allows further variants to be defined in terms of which
features differ from standardSDSand which features remain unchanged. These standard
features areISTANDARD,DSTANDARD,DHSTANDARD,TSTANDARD, andT MSTANDARDand can be
seen in equations 3.22–3.26.

###### ISTANDARD=ISYNCHRONOUS(DSTANDARD,TSTANDARD) (3.22)

###### DSTANDARD=DPASSIVE(DHSTANDARD) (3.23)

###### DHSTANDARD=DHUNIFORM (3.24)


###### TSTANDARD=TBOOLEAN(T MSTANDARD) (3.25)

###### T MSTANDARD=T MUNIFORM (3.26)

#### 3.3.4 Omissions of the formalism

In the formalism defined in section 3.3.2, certain aspects of a variant of SDS are not defined.
The initialisation behaviour of a variant is omitted as the effect of initialisation is similar
to the effect of the diffusion phase (as described in section 3.3.4.1 below) and hence any
duplication in description is avoided. The set of microtests that agents use in the test phase
is also ignored as this is specific to each application ofSDS, to consider each instance of
SDSwith a unique set of microtests to be a distinct variant would prohibit any meaningful
grouping. When describing a specific instance of SDS it may be necessary to describe the
set of microtests, but this is not necessary when describing a variant. The number of agents
in a swarm is not considered to define a variant, and is considered to be a parameter which
must be manually selected. Outside of extreme values which are so small that stable cluster
formation is impossible, or so large that processing the swarm is impractical, swarm size
does not effect any qualitative differences in performance.

##### 3.3.4.1 Initialisation

The purpose of initialisation is to set the hypotheses of all agents in preparation for the first
test phase which is the same purpose as the diffusion phase. Therefore the initialisation
phases can usually by entirely omitted if the diffusion phase will be performed before
the first test phase. Reversing the order of the diffusion phase and test phase makes no
significant difference in the dynamical behaviour ofSDS[14]. As noted by Bishop [6], in
cases where knowledge of the search space is available a priori then this can be used to
distribute the hypotheses accordingly, such as weighting the initial distribution towards
one end of a one dimensional search space if solutions have most commonly been located
there. While this is a valid observation, it can also be considered to be an effect of the
diffusion phase. Any knowledge about the probable distribution of solutions in a search
space may be incorporated into the hypothesis selection function, which will therefore be


utilised during any diffusion phase instead of during only the first iteration.
Consider for example an instance of string-search SDS where the target string has a larger
probability appearing towards the end of the search space towards the beginning, one could
initialise hypotheses of agents with a probability distribution weighted towards the end of
the search space, but this would only have any benefit if one of the agents was initialised
with the hypothesis that pointed to the solution. A better solution would be to similarly
weight the probability distribution for selection of new hypotheses, and potentially benefit
from the knowledge at every diffusion phase. Even in cases where the knowledge only
applies during the first iteration an effect identical to that of the initialisation phase may be
achieved by a method of new hypothesis selection that behaves differently during the first
iteration.
Furthermore by removing the initialisation phase the process of SDS can be seen more
clearly as a procession of alternating diffusion phases and test phases. This interpretation
makes it easier to see how a swarm resulting from any variant of SDS may be subsequently
modified by any other variant ofSDS. Put another way, each iteration of any variant ofSDS
can be understood as the initialisation phase of another variant ofSDS.
Using the final state of a swarm in one instance of SDS as the initial state of the swarm
in another instance of SDS has been investigated by Grech-Cini [32]. In the case studied,
facial features were being tracked in the individual frames of a video. The location of the
target in one image is likely to be close to its location in the previous image, hence the
distribution of the swarm from the previous instance can be used as the initial distribution
in a subsequent instance. This technique was found to be successful in the task of locating
the ear-nose region in a video of a person reading a passage of a text.

##### 3.3.4.2 Extraction

The method of extraction is also omitted as this mechanism remains largely the same over
all variants. Many variants of SDS converge to a single large cluster, some converge to
a number of clusters with sizes proportional to the score of the hypothesis, and some
distribute agents most densely in the region of the search space near the highest scoring
hypotheses, all of these can be interpreted as indicating solution quality with cluster size,
the exact way this information will be used is specific to the nature of the task.


### 3.4 Variants ofSDS.

The following sections each describe a category of variants ofSDS. First, implementation
variants are those which modify something about the operation of SDS without having a
significant impact on its performance as a search algorithm so as to enable SDS to be imple-
mented in situations otherwise unsuitable. The remaining variants can be seen as biasing
the behaviour of SDS towards exploration, evaluating further hypotheses, or exploitation,
converging to currently maintained hypotheses, but there are many dimensions in which
this bias can be effected.
Convergence variants affect behaviour of agents so as to modify the set of hypotheses
from a given search space at which clusters may form. Exploration variants affect the
interactions between agents so as to modify the diffusion of hypotheses through the swarm
and therefore modify the probability of the optimal hypothesis being located. Heuristic
variants use external knowledge of a search task to modify the behaviour of agents to be
more suitable for that task, the range of possible optimisations is very large as each search
task may have its own peculiarities to be optimised against, and for all heuristic variants
the performance is only improved as long as the assumption underlying the heuristic is
accurate.
Each variant is described in a number of aspects, there is the variation in individual be-
haviour, the resulting variation in the population behaviour, and the change in performance
of the algorithm. Each change in performance of SDS has both advantages and disadvan-
tages, in accordance with the No Free Lunch (NFL) theorems. Introduced in [107] and
applied to search algorithms in [109]^2 , the NFL theorems state that over the set of all possi-
ble search spaces, there can be no algorithm which performs better on average than random
search. The implication of the NFL theorems in the context of comparing SDS variants is
that over the set of all possible search spaces there are as many search spaces for which
standardSDSoutperforms a given variant than there are search spaces for which the same
variant outperforms standardSDS. This claim can also be applied to any two variants ofSDS
and also to any variant of SDS and any other search algorithm. Given the NFL theorems,
the emphasis of any variant should not be evaluated solely on the advantage it introduces,
but rather the trade-off it represents, and how large the effect of the trade-off should be

(^2) The apparent anomaly of a 1995 work building on a 1996 work is that the former was based on a pre-print
of the latter


```
to maximise the net-gain in performance after the negative impact of the disadvantage is
realised against the positive effect of the advantage. The optimal choice of variant and the
associated parameters should therefore be considered in the context of the search space of
the given task and the requirements of the solution.
```
#### 3.4.1 Implementation variants

Some variants of SDS have been shown to exhibit only a small performance decrease when
compared to standardSDS, but enable SDS to be implemented in significantly different ways.
For example, requirements for SDS to be implemented in hardware have been identified
as, i) the internal state of agents is unavailable to other agents, ii) asynchronous mode
of iteration, iii) limited connectivity between agents, and iv) a one-way communication
protocol [14]. Other variants described here, which affect the implementation of SDS but do
not significantly affect performance, are active diffusion, and deterministicSDS.

##### 3.4.1.1 Asynchronous iteration

The behaviour of SDS has been studied in three distinct modes of iteration: synchronous,
where all agents perform the mode of testing and then all agents perform the mode
of diffusion; asynchronous [14], where each agent individually performs the mode of
diffusion followed by the mode of testing; and parallel [14], where all agents perform mode
of diffusion and mode of testing in their own time. While these variants are significant, they
do not significantly change the performance of most variants except for the time scale [16].
In asynchronous iteration, each agent individually performs the diffusion behaviour fol-
lowed by the test behaviour, shown in algorithm 12. It is one of the requirements for
implementing SDS in hardware, and yet it does not affect the resource allocation behaviour
ofSDS[14].

**Algorithm 12** IASYNCHRONOUS— Asynchronous iteration
1: **function** IASYNCHRONOUS(D,T, swarm)
2: **function** I’( )
3: **for each** agent **in** swarm **do**
4: D(agent)
5: T(agent)
6: **return** I’


```
In parallel iteration each agent has a probability distribution over time to update its state,
shown in algorithm 13.
```
**Algorithm 13** IPARALLEL— Parallel iteration
1: **function** IPARALLEL(D,T, swarm)
2: **function** I’( ) .any agent may perform either action at any time
3: **for each** agent **in** swarm **do**
4: after some time performD(agent)
5: after some time performT(agent)
6: **return** I’

One of the aims of formulating asynchronous variants of SDS is to cast the algorithm in such
a way that it may be more naturally implemented in electronic hardware, whilst retaining
the essential characteristics of the algorithm. Though formulated with hardware imple-
mentation in mind, there have been software implementations of each of the individual
requirements which retained the characteristic behaviour ofSDS. Asynchronous iteration
allocates resources in the same way as synchronous iteration, hence so does parallel itera-
tion as it is a special case of asynchronous iteration [14]. Similarly, the strong convergence
criterion holds for asynchronous iteration [14] and hence also for parallel iteration. When
_α_ =1 all agents will converge on the optimal hypothesis with probability 1 [14, p.24]. In
which case the number of iterations before all agents maintain the optimal hypothesis can
be computed as
TC=

```
A− 1
a∑= 0 A
```
```
2
(A−a)(a+ (A−a)p α ) (3.27)
```
#### 3.4.1.2 Private internal state

One of the features required for a hardware implementation of SDS was that agents may
not directly access the internal state of other agents [14]. A mode of diffusion in which
agents do not need to access the activity value of other agents (though still need to access
the hypothesis of other agents) is described in algorithm 14. Note that the action of the
polling agent is not affected by the activity of the polled agent. The polling agent always
assumes the hypothesis of the polled agent, and the polled agent then does or does not
generate a new hypothesis depending on its own activity.
It has been shown that the probability of an inactive agent assuming the optimal hypothesis
during diffusion is identical for passive diffusion and private internal state diffusion,
though the convergence time of an SDS using private internal state diffusion is marginally


**Algorithm 14** DPASSIVE— Private internal state diffusion
1: **function** DPASSIVE(DH, swarm)
2: **function** D’(agent)
3: **if** agent is inactive **then**
4: hypothesis of agent←DH()
5: polled←random agent in swarm
6: hypothesis of agent←hypothesis of polled
7: **if** polled is inactive **then**
8: hypothesis of polled←DH()
9: **return** D’

```
longer [14].
```
#### 3.4.1.3 Limited connectivity

The notion of limited connectivity, in which agents may only communicate with a subset of
the swarm, was introduced with the original description ofSDS[6]. Where in standardSDS
each agent may poll any other agent in the swarm, variants have been developed where an
agent may only poll a subset of the swarm.
If an agent may poll a second agent then the first agent can be thought of as being connected
to the second agent. It is not required that all connections are reciprocal so one agent being
connected to another does not necessitate that both agents are connected to each other. The
set of all agents to which one agent is connected is named that agent’s neighbourhood. The
neighbourhoods of all agents can therefore be represented as the adjacency matrix of an
unweighted directed graph. The number of possible connection configurations of a swarm
of sizeAis therefore 2 A^2. Of all the possible connection configurations, a few types have
been studied for their effects on the performance ofSDS.
Reciprocal connectivity in an orthogonal grid, where each agent was bi-directionally
connected to their four neighbours, has been shown to be sufficient for the effective
performance ofSDS[6]. While the reduced number of connections necessarily slows
the diffusion of hypotheses through the swarm, the reduced complexity of the swarm
significantly increases the feasibility of implementing SDS in hardware.

The performance of swarms with limited connectivity has been investigated experimen-
tally [14]. An variant of SDS usingIASYNCHRONOUSwas implemented with swarms of 16, 32
and 64 agents named ‘lattices’ and the number of connections between each agent was


varied over the experiments. A fully connected lattice is equivalent to standardSDSand
hence can be described by existing models. In comparing the convergence time for a fully
connected lattice with that of the convergence time of simulations of partially connected
lattices, it was shown that convergence is possible and with only a relatively small increase
in convergence time even for lattices with few connections. For example, performance was
“acceptable” with 4 to 6 connections in a lattice of 16 to 64 agents [14].

```
Further experimental work showed that performance is only slightly degraded if con-
nectivity is significantly reduced, as long as the lattice exhibited random or small-world
connectivity [17]. A lattice exhibits random connectivity when each agent is connected to a
small number of other agents selected uniformly randomly. A lattice exhibits small-world
connectivity when the majority of each agent’s connections are to nearby agents, with a
small number of connections to randomly chosen agents. Relatively long-distance connec-
tions are more costly in terms of materials and engineering complexity, so small-world
networks have the advantage of requiring mostly short connections, but the small number
of random and potentially long-distance connections ensure that the most nodes can be
reached from all other nodes in a small number of steps. Small-world networks are there-
fore the preferred network topology for hardware implementation. An implementation
of SDS on a chip was designed, which used limited connectivity, resulting in 64 agents
arranged in four layers of 4 ×4 [102]; no performance results have been published. It was
noted that the good performance of SDS under limited connectivity has further implications
as biological neural structures have been observed as exhibiting analogous small-world
connectivity, hence relaxing the requirements of full connectivity in SDS leads to a more
biologically plausible architecture.
The most important aspect regarding limited connectivity is that the performance of
SDSis negligibly affected unless the neighbourhoods of all agents are extremely limited.
This therefore enables SDS to be implemented in various architectures in which the full
connectivity of standardSDSwould be impractical.
```
#### 3.4.1.4 Active diffusion

```
Where passive diffusion defines that inactive agents poll random agents with the possibility
of receiving a new hypothesis from an active agents, active diffusion relies on the active
```

agents polling for inactive agents to which they pass their current hypothesis (DACTIVE,
Algorithm 15). The resulting behaviour is very similar to passive diffusion, though slightly
less robust due to being more sensitive to the effect of noise [62, p. 164]. The cause of
the slightly reduced robustness is that in certain cases clusters increase in size slower
than under passive polling. As each active agent may poll at most one other inactive
agent, a cluster cannot increase in size faster than doubling each iteration, where in passive
diffusion there is a possibility that all inactive agents will assume the same hypothesis in a
single iteration.

There is a minor issue in implementing active diffusion; it is not clearly defined what should
happen when an active agent attempts to impose their hypothesis on an agent which has
already received a hypothesis from another active agent. Either the inactive agent should
assume the new hypothesis, and hence slightly reduce the number of diffused hypotheses,
or a mechanism needs to be implemented to avoid this feature, which would increase
algorithmic complexity. There is also a question of when inactive agents should select a new
hypothesis. One option (TACTIVE, Algorithm 15) is for all agents to select a new hypotheses
whenever they become inactive. There is a risk that under this scheme agents may select
a new hypothesis which is then discarded should an active agent immediately transmit
their hypothesis to the agent, if new hypothesis selection is an expensive action then this
extra work may be significant. Alternatively, once all active agents have performed their
polling action, any inactive agents which were not polled could select new hypotheses.
This method requires that the set of polled inactive agents is recorded somehow, at the cost
of some algorithmic complexity. In practice, the effect is often negligible [62, p.148].

Active diffusion is shown to evolve in a “very similar” [62] way to standardSDS, though
significantly more difficult to model mathematically, due to complications of the case of
an inactive agent being selected by more than one active agent. The one-step evolution
function for active diffusion shown in equation 3.28 and minimum convergence criteria is
shown in equation 3.29 [62].

```
factive( α , β ,c ̄i)= α
```
###### 

```
c ̄i+c ̄i
```
```
( 1 − β )−c ̄
i^2
```
###### (

```
1 − βα
```
###### )

```
c ̄i+ β
```
###### (

```
1 −c α ̄i
```
###### )

###### 

```
 1 −e−
```
```
(
c ̄i+ β ( 1 −c ̄ α i)
```
###### )

###### 

###### 

######  (3.28)


**Algorithm 15** DACTIVE— Active diffusion andTACTIVE— Testing for active diffusion

```
1: function DACTIVE(swarm) .Noimmediately on becoming inactiveDHrequired as agents select a new hypothesis
2: function D’(agent)
3: if agent is active then
4: polled←random agent in swarm
5: if polled is inactive then
6: hypothesis of agent←hypothesis of polled
7: return D’
8: function TACTIVE(T,DH)
9: function T’(agent)
10: microtest←T M()
11: partial evaluation←microtest(hypothesis of agent) .partial evaluation∈ B
12: if partial evaluation =true then
13: agent becomes active
14: else
15: agent becomes inactive
16: hypothesis of agent←DH()
17: return T’
```
```
α min=
```
###### 

###### 

###### 

```
β
1 −( 1 − β )e− β , if β >^0
0.5, if β = 0
```
###### (3.29)

The trade-off of active diffusion is that an arguably more natural behaviour is employed,
but at the expense of slightly increased complexity in implementing and analysing the
algorithm, and slightly reduced robustness. As the resulting practical behaviour is similar
to passive diffusion, most variants of SDS employ passive diffusion unless active diffusion
is a requirement for a specific implementation.

The combination of active diffusion and passive diffusion is known as dual diffusion. Each
inactive agent attempts to assume a hypothesis from an active agent and each active agent
attempts to impose their hypothesis on an inactive agent. As dual diffusion performs the
combined behaviour of two different diffusion variants it can be considered to be a form of
multi-diffusion, which is described in section 3.4.2.2.

#### 3.4.1.5 DeterministicSDS

```
SDSrelies on a random number generator in a number of steps, notably the selection of ran-
dom agents in the diffusion phase and the selection of random microtests in the test phase,
```

in a computational context this is assumed to be a pseudo-random number generator as is
included in the standard libraries of modern programming languages. This is in some sense
already not a random system as most pseudo-random number generators can be seeded
with a constant value and will always produce the same sequence of values. The random
number generator can be omitted entirely and any step which normally requires a random
action can be replaced with a deterministic and regular process. It has been shown, using a
simple iterative process, that SDS still performs a characteristic search, with exploration
of the search space followed by rapid convergence [16]. This deterministic variant was
observed to potentially offer improved performance if the deterministic sampling processes
were quicker to compute than the usual pseudo-random process, and that the deterministic
sampling process is guaranteed to provide samples evenly. As the performance gains of
speeding up the random sampling process are likely to be small, and modern pseudo
random number generators already provide fairly uniform sampling, the behaviour of a
deterministic SDS is likely to be indistinguishable from standardSDS. The advantage of not
requiring a pseudo-random number generator is that it reduces circuit complexity in the
case of hardware implementation ofSDS.

This group of variants, shows that there are diverse ways in which SDS can be implemented
without losing the characteristic behaviour of a non-greedy search utilising partial evalua-
tion and exhibiting a rapid convergence to a solution once identified by means of a positive
feedback loop. Each variant has its own trade off, but each are likely to have a negligible
impact on performance in practice outside of extreme cases.

### 3.4.2 Convergence variants

There are a number of variants which significantly effect the convergence ofSDS. The aim
of these variants is therefore to enable convergence for search spaces in which standard
SDSwould not converge, or to reduce the amount of the mean probability of an agent
at any non-optimal hypothesis becoming active for search spaces in which standardSDS
would converge so that convergence comes sooner. As anticipated by the NFL theorems,
each variant represents a trade-off. Each variant introduces some algorithmic complexity
to implement the additional behaviour and each variant introduces the requirement to
select at least one extra parameter. For each application of a convergence variant any extra
parameters introduced must be carefully selected else the performance may be worse than


```
standardSDSapplied to the same problem.
```
#### 3.4.2.1 Multi-testing

When investigating the effect of noise on the convergence time , it was observed that the
increased in time which resulted from the increase in noise could be reduced exponentially
as agents each performed more than one microtest during the test phase [6]. This mecha-
nism was hence named multi-testing. Multi-testing introduces two new parameters. They
are ‘amount’, the number of tests that each agent should perform in each test phase, and
‘combinator’ the method for combining the multiple results into a single activity value for
the agent. There are many possible combinators, the two which have been investigated
either returntrueif all partial evaluations aretrue, called AND-multi-testing, or returntrue
if any partial evaluations aretrue, called OR-multi-testing. An ‘amount’ of 1 or a combina-
tor which simply selects one of the partial evaluation results at random is equivalent to
standardSDS[62].
It has been shown that the effect of multi-testing is that the effective score of the optimal
hypothesis is increased (in the case of OR-multi-testing) or decreased (in the case of
AND-multi-testing) and the relative score of all other hypotheses is preserved [59]. The
term ‘effective score’ is used here as the fundamental quality of any hypothesis remains
unchanged, but the probability of an agent remaining active at any hypothesis after the
test phase changes.
The advantage of this mechanism is that, in being able to modify the effective score
of all hypotheses, values may be selected in which otherwise convergence would be
impossible due to _α_ < _α_ minor to reduce the amount of homogeneous background noise
( _β_ ). For example, OR-multi-testing increases the robustness factor ofSDS[62, p.88]. The
disadvantage of this mechanism is the increased computational complexity of the test
phase, as the number of microtests performed increases as a multiple of the number of
agents. Multi-testing is therefore most useful in cases where the optimal hypothesis scores
too poorly to form a stable cluster, or where too many suboptimal hypotheses score highly
enough to form a stable cluster. Multi-testing is described in algorithm 16.


**Algorithm 16** TMULTI-TESTING— Multi-testing and example combinators
1: **function** TMULTI-TESTING(T M, amount, combinator)
2: **function** T’(agent)
3: evaluations←empty list
4: **for** once per amount **do**
5: partial evaluation←microtest(hypothesis of agent)
6: append partial evaluation to evaluations
7: multi-evaluation←combinator(evaluations) .multi-evaluation∈ **B**
8: **if** multi-evaluation =true **then**
9: agent becomes active
10: **else**
11: agent becomes inactive
12: **return** T’
13: **function** AND-COMBINATOR(evaluations)
14: **if** all partial evaluations in evaluations aretrue **then**
15: **return** true
16: **else**
17: **return** false
18: **function** OR-COMBINATOR(evaluations)
19: **if** any partial evaluations in evaluations aretrue **then**
20: **return** true
21: **else**
22: **return** false

#### 3.4.2.2 Multi-diffusion

Multi-diffusion is similar to multi-testing, except the mode of diffusion includes polling of
multiple agents. The effect of multi-diffusion has not been studied directly but the studies
of three variants of polling, each of which enabled differing amounts of diffusion in each
iteration do provide some information. Active diffusion, which enabled the least diffusion
was shown to have the lowest robustness ( _ζ_ ) [62, p. 161], with passive diffusion having a
higher robustness and dual polling, which combined passive and active polling, to enable
the most diffusion in a single iteration, and hence the had the highest robustness (See
table 3.1). In an experiment utilising 1000 agents, a search space of size 10000, _β_ =0.1and
a variant denoted as

SDS(ISYNCHRONOUS(DMULTI-DIFFUSION(DHSTANDARD, 2, or-combinator),TSTANDARD),HFIXED( 1000 )))
(3.30)
the variant converged to the optimal hypothesis 77 times out of 100 when _α_ =0.4and
100 times out of 100 when _α_ =0.5whereas the same conditions utilising standardSDS
converged to the optimal hypothesis 0 times out of 100. Multi-diffusion is described in
algorithm 17.


```
Polling method ζ
Active polling 0.543
Passive polling 0.614
Dual polling 0.769
```
Table 3.1: A table summarising the robustness factors of each recruitment polling method
over all homogeneous background noise search spaces [62].

**Algorithm 17** DMULTI-DIFFUSION— Multi-diffusion and example combinators
1: **function** DMULTI-DIFFUSION(DH, amount, combinator)
2: **function** D’(agent)
3: **if** agent is inactive **then**
4: polled←list of random agents in swarm of length ‘amount’
5: result←combinator(polled)
6: **if** combined =false **then**
7: hypothesis of agent←DH()
8: **else**
9: hypothesis of agent←combined
10: **return** D’
11: **function** AND-COMBINATOR(polled)
12: **if** all agents in polled are active **then**
13: **return** random agent in polled
14: **else**
15: **return** false
16: **function** OR-COMBINATOR(polled)
17: **if** any agents in polled are active **then**
18: active polled←list of active agents in polled
19: **return** random agent in active polled
20: **else**
21: **return** false


The advantage of multi-diffusion is that convergence may be possible in search spaces in
which standard SDS will not converge due to the optimal hypothesis having an insufficiently
high score. The disadvantage is that in cases where convergence was already likely, the
steady state cluster sizes will be larger under multi-diffusion than under standardSDS.
The effect is that there will be fewer agents generating new hypotheses once a cluster has
formed. In cases where the first cluster forms at a sub-optimal hypothesis this reduces
the probability of an agent locating the optimal hypothesis. Multi-diffusion is therefore
a method which biases the action of SDS towards being greedy, but with the benefit of
clusters being more stable.

#### 3.4.2.3 The hermit

Hermit diffusion is the name given to a variant in which agents will occasionally refuse
to communicate their hypothesis (DHERMIT, Algorithm 18) [31]. An equivalent mechanism
is to include a number of extra agents in the swarm which are permanently inactive and
perform no action other than to be available for polling during the diffusion phase. All
clusters will therefore have fewer inactive agents assuming their hypothesis each iteration,
but the rate at which agents are becoming inactive and leaving the cluster will remain
unaffected, hence all hypotheses will appear to have a lower score than in standardSDS.

**Algorithm 18** DHERMIT— Hermit diffusion
1: **function** DHERMIT(DH, hermitage, swarm)
2: **function** D’(agent)
3: **if** agent is inactive **then**
4: polled←random agent in swarm
5: p←truewith probability P(hermitage) .p∈ **B**
6: **if** polled is active **and not** p **then**
7: hypothesis of agent←hypothesis of polled
8: **else**
9: hypothesis of agent←DH()
10: **return** D’

The effect of the hermit is catastrophic in situations where the effective score of the optimal
hypothesis is reduced below _α_ min, therefore making convergence impossible. The effect of
the hermit is advantageous in situations where the search space contains many suboptimal
hypotheses with a high enough score to form a stable cluster, if the effective score of the
suboptimal hypotheses is reduced below minimum convergence criteria but the score of the
optimal hypothesis remains greater than minimum convergence criteria then convergence


```
time will be improved as there will be more inactive agents generating new hypotheses.
```
The opposite method, in which some agents are added to the swam which are permanently
active is not considered to be worth investigating. Firstly, any active agent needs to be
maintaining a particular hypothesis, how this hypothesis is selected is unclear, and secondly
the effect is likely to be similar to that of the secret optimist.

#### 3.4.2.4 The secret optimist

One variant introduces a probabilistic element into activity updating. Any agent whose
microtest failed will only become inactive a certain proportion of the time and hence will
perform further evaluations of their current hypothesis, this behaviour is known as the
secret optimist [31].

This has the effect of increasing the effective test scores of all hypotheses. This is useful in
the case where the score of the optimal solution is naturally low to form a stable cluster,
but has the negative effect of increasing the activity at suboptimal solutions, and hence
reducing the number of inactive agents exploring the search space.

This will be most useful in tasks where there is known to be a single optimal solution that
will score significantly higher than all other solutions, but does have a sufficiently high
score to form a stable cluster on its own.

This has the opposite effect to the hermit (Section 3.4.2.3, p.97) in that it raises the effective
scores of all hypotheses.

**Algorithm 19** TOPTIMIST— Secret optimist testing
1: **function** TOPTIMIST(T M, optimism)
2: **function** T’(agent)
3: microtest←T M()
4: optimistic←truewith probability P(optimism)
5: partial evaluation←microtest(hypothesis of agent) .partial evaluation∈ **B**
6: **if** partial evaluation =true **or** optimistic =true **then**
7: agent becomes active
8: **else**
9: agent becomes inactive
10: **return** T’

The effect on the minimum convergence criteria ( _α_ min) of theTOPTIMISTis given in equa-
tion 3.31 [31] whereiis the average number of iterations an agent will retain a failed


```
hypothesis.
α min= 21 ++i−i ββ (3.31)
```
```
α secret optimist=i+i α 1 (3.32)
```
While this is a larger value than with standard SDS the effective score of the optimal
hypothesis will also increase. The advantage of this variant is that _α_ minwill always be
lower than the equivalent case using standard SDS as long asi >0. Wheni=0 the
behaviour is identical to standardSDS. The disadvantage of this variant is that the effective
score of all hypotheses increases and so there will be an increase in the homogeneous
background noise.

### 3.4.3 Exploration variants

These variants modify the exploration behaviour of SDS which does not change which
clusters may form but in modifying the resource allocation during the search it will affect
the average number of iterations taken to locate the optimal hypothesis. The trade off is
that in order for there to be more agents selecting new hypotheses there must be fewer
agents evaluating existing hypotheses, this leads to clusters being less stable and potentially
collapsing altogether.

#### 3.4.3.1 Context-free diffusion and context-sensitive diffusion

```
Standard SDS has been criticised for its behaviour of forming a single large cluster, leaving
few agents to test hypotheses in the remainder of the search space, hence possibly missing
superior solutions [63]. To decrease the number of active agents and hence to increase
the number of agents generating new hypotheses two variants were defined in which
active agents may become inactive during the diffusion phase. The variants are named
context-free diffusion and context-sensitive diffusion.
Context-free diffusion (DCONTEXT-FREE, Algorithm 20, p.100) introduces a mechanism where
active agents poll an agent at random from the swarm and in the case that the polled
agent is active, the polling agent will become inactive and will generate a new hypothesis
usingDH. Context-sensitive diffusion (DCONTEXT-SENSITIVE, Algorithm 21, p.100) introduces
```

```
Context-freeSDS Context-sensitiveSDS
c ̄i+ 1 c ̄i[ 2 α ( 1 − β )]−c ̄i^2 [ 2 ( α − β )] c ̄i[ α ( 2 − β )]−c ̄i^2 ( 2 α − β )
α min 2 ( 11 − β ) 2 −^1 β
ζ 1 −ln 2≈0.307 2 ( 1 −ln 2)≈0.614
γ^2 α ( 21 ( α −− β ) β −)^1 α (^2 α −− β ) β −^1
```
Table 3.2: Comparison of the one step evolution function (c ̄i+ 1 ), minimum convergence
criteria ( _α_ min), robustness ( _ζ_ ), and steady state ( _γ_ ) of Context-freeSDSand Context-sensitive
SDS

```
a similar mechanism but adds an extra clause. Active agents poll an agent at random from
the swarm but the polling agent only becomes inactive and generate a new hypothesis
usingDHin the case where the polled agent is active and both agents share the same
hypothesis.
```
**Algorithm 20** DCONTEXT-FREE— Context-free diffusion
1: **function** DCONTEXT-FREE(DH, swarm)
2: **function** D’(agent)
3: polled←random agent in swarm
4: **if** agent is inactiveorpolled is active **then**
5: **if** agent is inactiveandpolled is active **then**
6: hypothesis of agent←hypothesis of polled
7: **else**
8: agent becomes inactive
9: hypothesis of agent←DH()
10: **return** D’

The one step evolution functions, minimum convergence criteria ( _α_ min), robustness ( _ζ_ ) and
steady state ( _γ_ ) for context-freeSDSand context-sensitiveSDShave been derived from
developments of the DDSM [62] and can be seen in Table 3.2, p.100.

**Algorithm 21** DCONTEXT-SENSITIVE— Context-sensitive diffusion
1: **function** DCONTEXT-SENSITIVE(DH, swarm)
2: **function** D’(agent)
3: polled←random agent in swarm
4: **if** agent is inactiveandpolled is active **then**
5: hypothesis of agent←hypothesis of polled
6: **else**
7: a←agent is inactive
8: b←polled is activeandhypothesis of agent = hypothesis of polled
9: **if** aorb **then**
10: agent becomes inactive
11: hypothesis of agent←DH()
12: **return** D’


These mechanisms effectively cap the number of agents that can be globally active, in the
case of context-freeSDS, or active in the same cluster, in the case of context-sensitiveSDS.
This is useful in cases where the first hypothesis at which a stable cluster forms is unlikely
to be the optimal solution.
Some publications [104, 72, 40, 105] refer to arelate phasein which the behaviours specific
to context-freeSDSand context-sensitiveSDStake place, but rather than defining a new
phase, these will be considered modifications of the diffusion phase to avoid unnecessary
complexity.

Three scenarios have been proposed, in which context-freeSDSmight be a better choice
than standardSDS[63].

1. there are multiple hypotheses that share the same score as the optimal hypothesis
    and the aim is to identify them all
2. the aim is to find the optimal hypothesis and the remaining hypotheses with the
    highest scores
3. the search space and/or microtests are changing over time, so the best solution at
    one time may not be so some time later

Where standardSDSwill equally allocate agents to two hypotheses of equal score over
many iterations, with one cluster being orders of magnitude larger than the other for
some time, and then a switch to the other one being larger context-freeSDSis able to
simultaneously maintain multiple swarms. In the case where there are two hypotheses
with equal scores in standardSDSone cluster will be orders of magnitude larger than the
other for some time, after which a switch will occur and the other cluster will be the larger.
context-freeSDSalso has the ability to maintain multiple swarms at hypotheses of different
score, but the cluster size is dramatically smaller for hypotheses of only slight difference in
score, due to the very non-linear gain amplification.
In summary context-freeSDSdistributes its resources more evenly than standardSDSbut
maintains a comparable stability of clusters supporting solutions.

This makes the modelling assumption that agents at the noise assumption will never
become inactive in the diffusion phase, but this is an imperfect assumption as the diffusion


phase will result in noise agents duplicating identical hypotheses.

#### 3.4.3.2 Hypothesis transmission noise

Uniformly random hypothesis selection has been described as a strength and a weakness
ofSDSIt is a strength asSDSdoes not require that there is a usable gradient in the objective
function of the search task, but it is a weakness asSDSis unable to utilise the information
should one exist [16].
In this variant, when an agent assumes a hypotheses from another agent, the hypothesis is
copied with some random perturbation, known as hypothesis transmission noise. This has
the effect that a form of hill-climbing behaviour emerges in the locality of the transmitted
hypothesis [16, 76]. This has the advantage of exploiting self-similarity of a search space,
which is when similarly located hypotheses have similar scores. This can be understood
intuitively by imagining a cluster near an optimal solution in a continuous search space.
The time for which agents at the cluster will remain active is a function of the score of that
hypothesis. Agents which diffuse to the side further away from the optimal will remain
active for a shorter time, and agents on the side towards the optimal will remain active for
longer, in this way the cluster will appear to flow towards the optimal until it is centred
upon it. This mechanism makes it very rare for agents to have identical hypotheses and so
a cluster must be considered to be a collection of agents with similar hypotheses rather than
identical hypotheses. The result may be ‘extracted’ by calculating the average hypothesis
of all active agents. A mode of diffusion utilising hypothesis transmission noise can be
seen in algorithm 22, it requires an extra parameter ‘noise’ which is a function which takes
a hypothesis as a parameter and returns a perturbed hypothesis.

There are many functions that could be used to perturb a hypothesis, an example using a
Gaussian distribution is given in algorithm 22. The amount of noise introduced, by using
a larger value for sigma in the example using Gaussian distribution, has an effect on the
speed with which a cluster will appear to move through a search space. The trade-off in
this context is that a faster moving cluster may miss smaller details of the search space and
effectively evaluate multiple hypotheses at once, with potentially misleading results. A
small amount of noise will lead to slower convergence and increases the probability that
the cluster will not move out of any local optima in the search space, of course a zero or


**Algorithm 22** DNOISE— Noisy diffusion and Gaussian noise
1: **function** DNOISE(DH, noise, swarm)
2: **function** D’(agent)
3: **if** agent is inactive **then**
4: polled←random agent in swarm
5: **if** polled is active **then**
6: h←hypothesis of polled
7: n←noise(h)
8: hypothesis of agent←n
9: **else**
10: hypothesis of agent←DH()
11: **return** D’
12: **function** NOISE(hypothesis, sigma)
13: d←gaussian distribution with standard deviation = sigma
14: x←random value from d
15: **return** hypothesis + x

```
negligable amount of noise is equivalent to standardSDSwhere clusters do not appear to
move at all. A mechanism has been suggested for estimating a value for the transmission
error online from the standard deviation of the test scores of an “elite sample” of the best
scoring agents [75].
```
The feature where, in the case of a large amount of noise, a cluster may effectively evaluate
multiple solutions may be an advantage or disadvantage depending on the context. For
some tasks it may be useful information that a certain area of the search space contains
many high scoring hypotheses, whereas in other tasks it may be essential that a single
hypothesis is evaluated in isolation. For example, consider the following variant ofSDS. In
a search space with a wide ‘spike’ of high scoring hypotheses around one area, and a much
thinner and slightly taller ‘spike’ in another area this variant ofSDSwould consistently
converge to the hypothesis representing the peak of the wider spike if the value for noise
was above a certain value and would consistently converge to the hypothesis representing
the peak of the thinner spike if the value for noise was lower than a certain value.

#### 3.4.3.3 Comparative partial evaluations

```
In cases where the partial evaluations for a search task are not easily described as a set of
boolean functions, the functions may instead return scalar values. When using standard
SDSeach microtest can be treated as if it were a boolean function by providing a threshold
for each microtest such that results over a certain value are considered to betrueand
results under the value are considered to befalse, while this will work for many cases it is
```

required that a threshold is chosen. At whichever level the threshold is selected hypotheses
which score just under the threshold for many of the microtests, or signficiantly over the
threshold in a small number of microtests will appear to have a poor score, similarly where
hypotheses with the opposite properties may appear to be high scoring hypotheses even
though the overall quality of the hypothesis may be lower than a hypothesis with a lower
effective score.

An alternative approach, which does not require a threshold is for agents to convert the
scalar values of the microtests to boolean values by comparing them with the scalar value
obtained by an agent at a different hypothesis.

**Algorithm 23** TCOMPARATIVE— Comparative testing
1: **function** TCOMPARATIVE(T M)
2: **function** T’(agent)
3: polled←randomly selected agent in swarm
4: microtest←T M()
5: partial evaluation a←microtest(hypothesis of agent)
6: partial evaluation p←microtest(hypothesis of polled)
7: **if** partial evaluation a > partial evaluation p **then**
8: agent becomes active
9: **else**
10: agent becomes inactive
11: **return** T’

The advantage of this approach is that a threshold does not need to be chosen, the threshold
is effectively selected by the action of the evolving swarm, each iteration effectively removes
half of the swarm which evaluates lower than average. The disadvantage is that as there
is no minimum threshold for activity, the highest scoring hypotheses located so far will
always maintain a cluster, convergence therefore cannot be detected from the global activity
alone. There is a further disadvantage that it is possible for the superiority of one hypothesis
to be intransitive. This means that there may be set of three or more hypotheses such that
each hypothesis consistently scores higher than one other hypothesis. This can be seen in
the case where three hypothesesA,B, andCeach score[2, 2, 6, 6, 7, 7],[1, 1, 5, 5, 9, 9], and
[3, 3, 4, 4, 8, 8]respectively. If a partial evaluation is to select at random a single value from
the list pertaining to that hypothesis thenAwill most commonly evaluate higher thanB,B
will most commonly evaluate higher thanC, andCwill most commonly evaluate higher
thanA. In such cases the global activity of anSDSremains high, but the hypothesis of the
largest cluster remains unstable.


### 3.4.4 Heuristic variants

Variants which employ heuristics of a specific task, as is the nature of heuristics the
performance of the search will be improved as long as the heuristic is veridical.

#### 3.4.4.1 Fixed heuristics

If some information is known about the distribution of the scores of hypothesis in a search
space then new hypothesis selection may be modified so as to select hypotheses more
frequently from areas with a higher probability of containing hypotheses with higher scores.
If the information is accurate then the higher probability of selecting hypotheses with higher
scores will effectively increase the homogeneous background noise as more randomly
selected hypotheses will have higher scores but the probability of selecting the optimal
hypothesis will also be higher. Similarly, if one microtest is known to be significantly more
valuable in determining the quality of a solution represented by a hypothesis the mode
of microtest selection can employ a probability distribution to bias selection towards the
more informative microtests. A related technique is to select a hypothesis which is furthest
away from any previously selected hypothesis [76], this method is almost the opposite
of selecting a hypothesis from an area of the search space which has been proven to be
relatively dense with high scoring hypotheses, and as such this method is more likely to
perform a search which is well distributed through the search space.

```
In cases where the search space is too large to practically enumerate all hypotheses a mode
of hypothesis selection may be employed that uses an existing heuristic. Consider for
example the TSP, the number of possible routes is of the ordern!wherenis the number of
cities, selecting one route from the set of all possible routes may be impractical. Therefore
a heuristic may be employed such as a stochastic greedy method, or a heuristic which
guarantees to only select paths with certain features. Similarly, in the task of estimating a
hyperplane that best describes a set of points a hypothesis can be stochastically constructed
by fitting a hyperplane to a small randomly selected subset of the points. Heuristics
such as these have the potential to dramatically reduce the size of a search space, and
hence to speed up the convergence time ofSDS, they achieve this however by leaving
significant sections of the search space unexplored. It is therefore most suitable to apply
a fixed heuristic in cases where a uniformly random search of the search space would be
```

```
impractical, or when strong heuristics exist for the given task.
SDSis not limited to using existing heuristics however, a method of adapting a heuristic as
the search evolves is readily available.
```
#### 3.4.4.2 Adaptive heuristics

In all the variants examined so far, when an agent selects a new hypothesis they do so
entirely independently of the rest of the swarm. As there are likely to be many agents
maintaining a range of hypotheses an agent may use the distribution of hypotheses over
the set of active agents as information on how to bias the selection of their next hypothesis.
A hypothesis may also be constructed from the combination of parts of the hypotheses
of various agents. This is analogous to the technique employed by ACO, where a path
is constructed probabilistically by combining sections of the route that were previously
evaluated. An agent is therefore no longer required to generate the optimal hypothesis
entirely at random. A swarm can be imagined to be evaluating hypothesis not just for
their standalone value, but for the potential that they consist of strong parts suitable for
recombination into other hypotheses. Care should be taken not to lean too heavily on the
hypotheses of active agents as it is effectively a form of multi-diffusion, which increases
the ‘greedyness’ of the search. Consider the extreme case where a new hypothesis is
‘constructed’ by simply taking the hypothesis of an active agent, this is exactly equivalent
to passive diffusion.
As with fixed heuristics the performance will be improved as long as the underlying
assumption is valid, which in this case is that a strong hypothesis can be combined from
the features of other strong hypotheses. This kind of polling based heuristic is therefore
most suitable in cases where a uniformly random search of the search space is impractical,
and where no strong heuristics are applicable for the task.

### 3.4.5 Halting variants

```
There are many techniques to haltSDS, and most can be combined. Some use detection of
cluster formation as a means to determine when to finish.
```

#### 3.4.5.1 Time based halting

**Fixed iteration halting and fixed wall-clock time halting** A very simple method of halt-
ing, fixed iteration count halting (HFIXED, algorithm 11, p.83) has already been described.
This method simply keeps track of the number of iterations elapsed, and halts once a
given threshold is reached. A suitable value for the maximum number of iterations must
be defined beforehand and doing so requires striking a balance between more thorough
evaluations of a search space, at the expense of longer execution times, and timely results,
at the expense of a higher change of optimal hypothesis. Halting after a certain amount of
real time is also a valid method, but this method is rarely explored in academic studies so as
to avoid any results being dependant on specifics of the host hardware, the software which
is implementing theSDS, and the task-specific microtests. Real-time threshold halting has

**Algorithm 24** HTIME— Fixed wall-clock time halting
1: **function** HTIME(maximum time)
2: elapsed time← 0
3: **function** H’( )
4: update elapsed time
5: halt←elapsed time > maximum time .halt∈ **B**
6: **return** halt
7: **return** H’

analogous advantages and disadvantages to fixed iterations halting.
Fixed iteration count halting and Fixed wall-clock time halting are the only halting methods
which are guaranteed to halt over all search spaces, whether this is an advantage or
disadvantage is dependent on the search task to which it is being applied. This is an
advantage in cases where halting before convergence, or before convergence to a hypotheses
with a sufficient score is unacceptable, in such cases it may be preferable to loop indefinitely
than to proceed with an unsuitable solution. This is a disadvantage in cases where any
decision is better than no decision, in such cases even the poorest of hypotheses represent a
better case than failing to proceed at all.

**Algorithm 25** HINDEFINITE— Indefinite halting
1: **function** HINDEFINITE( )
2: **function** H’( )
3: **return** false
4: **return** H’


**Indefinite halting** An instance ofSDSdoes not need to halt to be useful, at any time in its
execution a separate process may read the state of the swarm and calculate the clusters.
This has been described as the preferred method of halting for dynamically changing
problems, whereSDSis used to maintain a solution to an objective function that is changing
over time [16, p.115]. The obvious disadvantage is that this method potentially requires
an unlimited amount of resources. If a cluster has formed at the optimal hypothesis, and
the search space is not evolving over time, then there is no value to be gained in further
searching and there is a small but ever-present risk that the cluster will spontaneously
collapse. Furthermore a sampling strategy will need to be defined, which will introduce a
number of extra configuration parameters and thresholds. The advantage of this method is
that a series of solutions could be reported from an ever changing search space.

#### 3.4.5.2 Cluster size based halting

**Unique hypothesis count** A method which halts when the number of unique hypotheses
maintained by the entire swarm is lower than a certain threshold. This method was used in
an application ofSDSto realistically place objects in a visual scene [10]. As convergence is
characterised by the formation of a single large cluster, this necessitates that many agents
will be maintaining the same hypothesis and therefore only the relatively few remaining
agents may maintain distinct hypotheses. The advantage of this method is that the chosen
value for the threshold parameter controls the minimal quality of a hypothesis that will
induce a halt. The disadvantage of this method is that the threshold must be chosen with
respect to the background noise, as search spaces with high homogeneous background
noise will quickly converge to states with relatively few hypotheses, and search spaces
with very low homogeneous background noise will have many distinct hypotheses even
after the formation of a large cluster.

**Algorithm 26** HUNIQUE— Unique hypothesis count halting
1: **function** HUNIQUE(unique count) .unique count∈ **N**
2: **function** H’( )
3: hypotheses←hypotheses of agents in swarm
4: unique←unique values in hypotheses
5: halt←unique < unique count .halt∈ **B**
6: **return** halt
7: **return** H’


```
Largest cluster size and global activity threshold halting There are two closely related
halting methods which halt when a certain value reached a given threshold. The values are
i) the largest cluster size, and ii) the global activity. These methods are similar as global
activity is a proxy for the largest cluster size. This can be understood intuitively as once
a stable cluster has formed, the level of global activity is equal to the size of the largest
cluster plus the activity of all background noise hypotheses, and as the background noise is
naturally stable, the level of global activity will correlate with the size of the largest cluster.
The advantage of these halting methods is that, like unique hypothesis count halting,
```
**Algorithm 27** HLARGEST— Largest cluster size halting
1: **function** HLARGEST(swarm, threshold) .threshold∈[0, 1]
2: **function** H’( )
3: cluster←largest cluster
4: count←number of active agents in cluster .count∈ **N**
5: largest←swarm sizecount .largest∈ **R**
6: halt←largest >= threshold .halt∈ **B**
7: **return** halt
8: **return** H’

**Algorithm 28** HACTIVITY— Global activity threshold halting
1: **function** HACTIVITY(swarm, threshold) .threshold∈[0, 1]
2: **function** H’( )
3: active count←number of active agents in swarm .active count∈ **N**
4: activity←active countswarm size .activity∈ **R**
5: halt←activity >= threshold .halt∈ **B**
6: **return** halt
7: **return** H’

the chosen value for the threshold parameter controls the minimal quality of a hypothesis
which will induce a halt. These halting methods, like unique hypothesis count halting,
also require that the threshold is chosen with respect to the amount of noise in a search
space as higher values of global activity will be encountered in search spaces with higher
homogeneous background noise, even if the score of the optimal hypothesis is the same.
The disadvantage of largest cluster size halting in comparison with global activity halting
is that the calculation of the largest cluster size is somewhat more computationaly complex
than the calculation of the global activity as size of all clusters must be calculated, rather
than simply counting the number of active agents.

A disadvantage of all threshold based halting methods is that halting as soon as the
threshold is reached introduces the possibility that clusters which has begun forming
at superior hypotheses are missed. A way to mitigate this possibility is to detect stable


convergence which requires that clusters form and subsequently stabilize, as this will
ensure that the clusters detected were stable, and that superior clusrers were no in the
process of forming.

#### 3.4.5.3 Convergence based halting

```
Convergence is detected by a stability in the swarm, theoretically this refers to a stability in
the sizes of the largest cluster. In some variants the global activity is a suitable proxy [62]
and a more convenient value to calculate. In some variants, such asDCONTEXT-SENSITIVE,
multiple significant stable clusters may form, and in others such asTCOMPARATIVEglobal
activity is always stable, in these cases convergence must be detected using other methods.
```
**Strong and weak halting criteria** One convergence based halting method is described in
the original definition ofSDS[6]. This method, known as the strong halting criterion [64,
p.8], halts when the size of the largest cluster is determined to be stable over a number of
iterations. Stability is defined by two parametersaandbwhich define the size of largest
clusterc, which will induce a halt and a tolerance of error in which the largest cluster size
may fluctuate and still be considered stable. The strong halting criteria are defined as

a,b∃> 0 (^2 b<A∧b+a≤A∧a−b≥^0 )∃n 0 n>∀n 0 (|c−a|<b) (3.33)
Given the values;a, the cluster size which is sufficiently large to indicate convergence; and
b, an amount the cluster size may vary and still be considered stable, then the algorithm
has reached equilibrium under the strong halting criteria if there exists an instantn 0 after
which the largest cluster sizecis sufficiently stable such thata−b≤cn≤a+b, otherwise
written as|cn−a|<b. In practice this requires a further variablet, which defines a number
of iterations that|cn−a|<bmust hold for the algorithm to halt. This ensures that even
when the search converges on a solution that there will be more searching for a hypothesis
with a potentially higher score before the search halts. The weak halting criteria, identical
in all respects except thancnrefers to the global activity rather than the size of the largest
cluster, exhibits identical performance in detecting convergence.

The advantage of these methods is that the algorithm will not halt whilst a cluster is in
the process of forming. As with cluster size based halting methods the requirement for


**Algorithm 29** HSTRONG— Strong halting
1: **function** HSTRONG(a, b, T)
2: t← 0
3: **function** H’( )
4: c←largest cluster size
5: **if** |c−a|<b **then**
6: t←t+ 1
7: **else**
8: t← 0
9: halt←t>T .halt∈ **B**
10: **return** halt
11: **return** H’

**Algorithm 30** HWEAK— Weak halting
1: **function** HWEAK(a, b, T)
2: t← 0
3: **function** H’( )
4: c←global activity
5: **if** |c−a|<b **then**
6: t←t+ 1
7: **else**
8: t← 0
9: halt←t>T .halt∈ **B**
10: **return** halt
11: **return** H’

the largest cluster size to be consistently within the region defined by|cn−a|<bensures
that the process will only halt when a hypothesis with a sufficiently high score has been
located. A disadvantage of this method is that the region of stability defined byaand
bhas to be selected carefully, ifb< 1 −aholds then there will be a value forcwhich is
both outside of the region, but also representing a relatively high scoring hypothesis. For
example, ifa=0.8andb=0.1then to converge it must hold that0.7<c<0.9. The
process would therefore never halt ifcremained stable around0.999even though this
represents convergence to a hypothesis with a high score.

**Running-mean stability** An alternative method to detect convergence without selecting
a global activity threshold is to record the global activity for a given number of iterations
and halt when the standard deviation of the recorded values is within a given threshold.
This method requires the selection of a number of parameters: the maximum memory size
which determines the number of iterations to record at any one time, after which each new
value recorded causes the oldest recorded value to be forgotten; the minimum stability
which is the value which standard deviation of the recorded values must be lower than to


```
be considered stable, and; minimum stable iterations, which is the number of consecutive
iterations which must be considered stable before halting. The advantage of this method is
```
**Algorithm 31** HSTABLE— Stable global activity halting
1: **function** HSTABLE(max memory size, min stability, min stable iterations)
2: memory←empty queue of maximum length ‘max memory size’
3: stable iterations← 0
4: halt←false
5: **function** H’( )
6: activity←active agents in swarmswarm size
7: push activity into memory
8: stability←standard deviation of all values in memory
9: **if** stability <= min stability **then**
10: stable iterations←stable iterations + 1
11: **if** stable iterations >= min stable iterations **then**
12: halt←true
13: **else**
14: stable iterations← 0
15: **return** halt
16: **return** H’

that convergence will be detected for a hypothesis of any score sufficient to form a stable
cluster. There is a disadvantage that this method will halt too soon if no solution is located
within the first few iterations as the largest cluster size being stable at very low values will
induce a halt.

This method therefore benefits from being combined with a cluster size based halting
method to avoid the case where it halts before a stable cluster has formed.

#### 3.4.5.4 Combined halting methods

As the output of each halting method is a boolean value they can be combined using
boolean logical operators to form new halting methods. Any such combined halting
method will exhibit the advantages and disadvantages of the component halting methods
but in working together may produce more consistent performance than any individual
halting method.
For example, the combined halting method

```
HAND
```
###### (

###### HFIXED( 1000 ),HOR(HFIXED( 10000 ),HACTIVITY(0.5))

###### )

```
guarantees at least 1000 iterations, after which will only halt once the global activity
```

reaches0.5or a maximum of 10,000 iterations elapse. Such a combined halting method
will avoid the disadvantage of global threshold halting, where the algorithm may halt
after the early formation of a cluster before significant exploration of the search space
is performed, as long as a superior solution is found within10, 000iterations. Similarly
the disadvantage of global activity threshold halting potentially never halting is also
mitigated by the fixed iterations halting method. These mitigations come at the cost of
some increased algorithmic complexity and the requirement to select values for the three
thresholds (minimum iterations, global activity threshold, and maximum iterations) with
all the considerations already described.

A practical combination of the halting methods described in this section is defined in
algorithm 32, this halting function is guaranteed to halt after a defined upper limit of
iterations, and will halt earlier if a stable cluster forms over a given size and will ignore
any activity from clusters which form before a defined lower limit. As with the simpler
combined halting method described above, there is increased algorithmic complexity, and
the requirement of five arguments to be manually determined.

**Algorithm 32** Example combined halting
1: **function** HCOMBINED(minimum iterations, maximum iterations, memory,
stable iterations, minimum activity )
2: **return** HOR(
3: HAND(
4: HFIXED(minimum iterations),
5: HSTABLE(memory, stable iterations),
6: HACTIVITY(minimum activity),
7: ),
8: HFIXED(maximum iterations)
9: )

### 3.4.6 Summary of variants ofSDS.

The behaviour introduced by each variant brings with it advantages and disadvantages.
Each variant therefore has superior performance than standardSDSin certain circumstances
and inferior performance than standardSDSin other circumstances. This trade-off is to
be expected and is in accordance with the No Free Lunch (NFL) theorems. For example,
the effect of multi-testing is to increase the effective score of all hypotheses, increasing
the ability of the optimal hypothesis to maintain a larger cluster but also increasing the
homogeneous background noise. Multi-testing therefore improves performance in cases


where a stable cluster would otherwise not form, and impairs performance in cases where
the increase in noise increases the time for the optimal hypothesis to be located. Just as with
standardSDS, over all possible search spaces any multi-testing variant will outperform
random search in as many search spaces as random search outperforms the multi-testing
variant. If any task can be considered to be a search over a subset of all the possible search
spaces then to select a variant ofSDSwithout any analysis of such a subset is to make the
assumption that by chance alone the subset of search spaces is one for which on average the
variant outperforms standardSDS, or indeed, random search [108]. This observation raises
the question of how one may identify which subset of search spaces are represented in a
given task and hence which variant is most likely to outperform standardSDS. A number
of features of search problems have been identified in which standardSDSexhibits greatest
performance [16], and this can be interpreted as an identification of the search spaces in
which standardSDSoutperforms random search. For all other variants some features of
search spaces which lead to improved or impaired performance have been identified.

The NFL theorems in context of halting variants are distinct from other variants as they
do not change the search or convergence behaviour of the algorithm. Time-based halting
functions merely change the number of iterations that will elapse before halting, the trade
off is therefore how long the algorithm must run before a user is confident that the optimal
hypothesis has been located, while the probability of locating the optimal hypothesis grows
over time for any non-greedy variant, optimality can never be guaranteed. A related
trade off occurs in the case of halting methods which examine the state of the swarm to
detect convergence, every method of detecting convergence introduces the potential for
the method to be deceived and hence to erroneously halt. As with time-based halting the
user will have to decide whether the risk of an erroneous halt is sufficiently low for each
application ofSDS.
SDSis most suitable for search tasks where there is little, or no, information available about
the distribution of solutions in the search space, and the evaluation of each element of the
search space can be decomposed into the evaluation of a number of separate functions.
SDSis less suitable for tasks where it is absolutely essential that a single, globally-optimal
solution is found, in which case an exhaustive search may be preferable, or when features
of the search space can be exploited to calculate the location of strong solutions rather than
relying on random hypothesis generation.


Like ACO,SDSis a stochastic procedure, where the locally guided action of individuals
gradually leads to the globally optimal behaviour of the swarm. Unlike ACO, the state
of an instance of standardSDScan be described with a list of the hypotheses of the active
agents, and a count of the inactive agents whereas ACO requires that the modifications to
the search space are represented somehow which which adds some memory requirements.
DFO shares an important property withSDS, both algorithms are sufficiently simple as to
facilitate mathematical analysis of their performance.
Furthermore some of the characteristic of swarm intelligence is demonstrated here, as
variants which modify individual behaviour in simple ways enable useful and varied
behaviour to emerge at the population level. Regarding the hermit, we see how a mecha-
nism which is equivalent to a swarm including a number of completely ineffective agents
can still result in an effective search, and in specific circumstances may even improve
performance. An investigation into the precise conditions in which the hermit improves
performance will be of some benefit. Similarly with the secret optimist, the simple case of
agents remaining active after a failed microtest could be interpreted as discarding valuable
information, but the effect is that search spaces in which standardSDSwould not converge
due to the optimal hypothesis having an insufficient score can be expected to converge
with an appropriate probability of ‘optimism’.

```
Regarding multi-diffusion, we have only observed that a variant in which agents poll two
agents, increases the robustness of the variant, at the expense of reduced exploration of
the search space by inactive agents. No investigation has been performed into an exact
formulation of the affect on robustness. As conceived the multi-diffusion behaviour is
related to the logicalORfunction, as diffusion will occur ifanypolled agents are active, an
alternative strategy would be related to the logicalANDfunction which would require that
allof the polled agents were active. This alternative would reduce the amount of diffusion,
and hence presumably reduce the robustness of the variant, and increase the amount of
exploration of the search space.
```

Figure 3.2: A flow chart of the emigration behaviour as observed by Robinson. Begin at
“Search for nest sites”.

## 3.5 Natural analogues ofSDS.

```
A number of investigations into natural swarm intelligence have described processes that
are analogous to various aspects ofSDS. These include: Robinson ant nest site selection.
```
### 3.5.1 Ant nest site selection

```
In 2013 J.M. Bishop and the author attended a lecture given by E.J.H. Robinson,Distributed
Decisions: New Insight from Radio Tagged Ants[87, 88] on the nest-site selection behaviour of
ants of the genusTemnothorax. In this lecture Robinson showed the observed behaviour of
individual ants engaged in the activity of evaluating a candidate site for a new nest.
Individual ants were observed to occasionally perform a search of the area outside of
their nest which resembled a random walk. If, during this process, the ant encountered
a location that may be a suitable site for a new nest then they would enter the candidate
nest site and perform an evaluation. When evaluating a candidate nest site an ant will
explore inside the nest and eventually reach an exit, ants did not necessarily visit all of the
candidate nest site, and did not follow any fixed path of exploration. If the candidate site
```

was evaluated to be of sufficient quality then the ant would return to their nest, recruit
another ant from the swarm, and lead it to the candidate nest site using a technique known
as tandem running. While tandem running, the leader ant will move a short distance in the
direction of the destination and then wait until the following ant has reached the leading
ant, this process is repeated until both ants arrive at the destination. Tandem running not
only brings two ants to a destination but also provides an opportunity for the following
ant to learn the route from the original nest. When the ants reach the destination both
perform the evaluating action and, if candidate nest site is determined to be of sufficient
quality, further recruitment. The result is that a strong candidate has an increasing number
of ants performing evaluations as the ants which were recruited into the evaluation process
begin to perform tandem runs of their own. Robinson observed that if the site was of
sufficient quality such that at any time approximately one third of the whole nest had
been recruited into the evaluation and recruitment process then those individuals would
undergo a behavioural phase change. In the new behaviour, rather than recruiting further
ants into the procedure, they would simply lift unrecruited ants (or eggs) in their mandibles
and deposit them at the candidate site. Ants transported in this way would not have made
the journey to the new nest themselves and no pheromone trail is formed that could be
followed, so they would not know the route between the two sites. This means transported
ants cannot perform the recruiting behaviour. Transported ants simply adopt the new
location as their new home, and play no further part in the process. Once all ants and
eggs had either been recruited into the evaluation procedure, or transported to the new
site, the nest has been fully migrated to its new site. Similar observations have been
made in experiments in which migrations were induced in colonies of the antLeptothorax
albipennis[79]. This procedure is described in a flow chart in Figure 3.2.

A similar experiment showed that repeated partial evaluation effectively implemented
a measure of the average quality of a resource which fluctuates over time [28]. In the
experiment, a colony was presented with two candidate nest sites, one of a quality sufficient
to initiate a migration and another which was initially significantly superior, but which was
occasionally modified to be of significantly inferior. The observed behaviour was that there
was a higher probability that the colony would migrate to whichever nest was superior on
average; in cases where the fluctuating nest was superior for half the time and inferior for
half the time there was an average probability of approximately0.5that the colony would
migrate to either nest.


### 3.5.2 Bee nest site selection

Similar experiments were performed involving the migration behaviour of colonies of
bees [96]. Primarily, the behaviour described had many similarities between the behaviour
observed in ants. The same process was followed, where scouts would search an area, and
on locating a candidate nest, recruit others to also evaluate it, leading to the formation of a
large swarm at the best located candidate. The most distinct difference being the method by
which one bee would locate a candidate nest site for another bee. The tandem running of
ants was replaced by the waggledance, and the transporting behaviour of ants is replaced
by a mass migration as a swarm

The waggle dance is a behaviour whereby a bee communicates information on various
attributes of a feature outside of the nest to other nearby bees. A feature may be a source
of nectar, or other features of interest, but in this context is a candidate nest site. The bee
repeatedly walks a path describing a short line in the nest whilst ‘waggling’ its abdomen;
on reaching the end of the line the bee alternately circles back to the beginning turning left
or right. The orientation of the line relative to gravity indicates the direction of the feature,
the length of the line is indicative of the distance of the feature from the nest, and features
such as the speed of waggling, and the number of times the bee walks along the line is
indicative of the bee’s evaluation of the quality of the feature.

### 3.5.3 Comparisons betweenSDSand nest site selection in ants and bees

The similarity between the recruiting behaviours ofSDSand recruiting behaviours in ants
have been previously recorded [16, 15], though this was in the context of ants foraging
for food, rather than selecting a nest site, nevertheless a process which employed tandem
running observed. This similarity was used as evidence which suggested that ants do not
require the cognitive capacity to directly compare two nest sites as, inSDS, the selection of
one hypothesis over another occurs without any direct comparison of hypotheses.

The processes described above have many close analogies withSDS. An ant or bee which
is not currently evaluating a nest site and is exploring their search space with a path
resembling a random walk is similar to an inactive agent selecting a hypothesis at random.
An ant or bee performing a partial evaluation of a candidate nest site by exploring the
nest using a path resembling a random walk is similar to an agent partially evaluating


a hypothesis by applying a randomly selected microtest. An ant or bee subsequently
performing one of two actions after a partial evaluation of a nest site is similar to an agent
becoming either active or inactive after performing a partial evaluation. An ant or bee
which was satisfied with the partial evaluation of a candidate nest site and recruiting a
random ant or bee to the evaluation process is similar to the hypothesis of an active agent
being copied by an inactive agent. An ant or bee which was not satisfied with the partial
evaluation of a candidate nest site and abandoning the evaluation of the candidate nest
site is similar to an inactive agent selecting a new hypothesis. A significant proportion of
the ant or bee colony simultaneously evaluating the same candidate nest site is similar to a
large number of agents maintaining the same hypothesis.

The experiments that showed the ability of ants to effectively calculate an average score
for a candidate nest site which fluctuated in value is analogous to the behaviour ofSDS
resulting from partial evaluations. Similarly in ant nest site selection the effective score
of a candidate nest site is a result of the average result of many partial evaluations. This
reflects the behaviour ofSDSunder certain circumstances, depending on the frequency at
which the score of hypothesis fluctuated between two values. If the number of iterations
between a fluctuation was large in comparison to the number of iterations required for a
cluster to stabilise, for example, once every thousand iterations, then the largest cluster
would similarly fluctuate between the superior hypothesis and the stable hypothesis. If
the number of iterations between a fluctuation was small in comparison to the number
of iterations required for a cluster to stabilise, for example, the hypothesis alternated in
quality every time an agent performed a microtest, then the fluctuating hypothesis would
be evaluated as if it had a score between the superior and inferior values. This latter case, of
frequent fluctuations is what was observed in ants [28], as the time for two fluctuations was
always ten minutes, and the time for a population to achieve quorum at a nest site was of
the order of one hundred minutes. This is further evidence thatSDSmodels aspects of the
nest site selection behaviour of ants, and that this successful evaluation can be conducted
by a swarm of agents with no global knowledge.

There are also a few differences betweenSDSand the process of nest site selection in ants
and bees. Candidate nest sites are not discovered with a uniform probability distribution,
as ants and bees explore their search space with a path resembling a random walk they
is a greater probability of locating candidate nest sites which are closer to their current


nest site than candidate nest sites which are further away from the their current nest site.
Ants or bees which abandon the evaluation of one candidate nest site are not required
to immediately begin evaluation on another candidate nest site, whereas an agent which
becomes inactive immediately selects a new hypothesis, either from an active agent, or
uniformly at random. Ants or bees which return to the nest recruit other ants or bees
they encounter, this is unlike the recruitment action of agents in two ways. First, the
selection of other ants or bees is arbitrary rather than uniformly at random. Second, ‘active’
ants i.e. ants which have recently performed a successful partial evaluation, recruit other
ants, whereas inSDSinactive agents assume the hypothesis of other agents. This can be
seen as more analogous to active diffusion (DACTIVE) than passive diffusion (DPASSIVE) as
it is individuals which have discovered a potential solution that perform the activity of
recruitment, ants and bees which have located a good candidate nest site recruit other ants
and bees. The equivalent behaviour for bees is mode analogous to passive diffusion as a
small portion of the colony observing a waggledance is similar to a number of inactive
agents polling the same active agent.

There is no close analogy inSDSwith the behavioural change, when ants or bees moved
from a recruiting behaviour to a migration behaviour. The aspect ofSDSclosest to the
behavioural change is the mode of halting, especially when applying a convergence based
halting variant, though the significant difference is that inSDSthe decision to halt is
performed by a single function with access to the state of the entire swarm, whereas the
decision of an ant or a bee to change behaviour must be informed by their individual
experience.

What remained unclear was the mechanism by which individual ants or bees decided
to move from recruiting behaviour to migration behaviour. This ability, called quorum
sensing, is essential for any swarm to act as a unit. Individuals may make decisions based
on local information, or on contacts with other members of the swarm, but decisions that
require mass action also require that a certain proportion of the swarm is in agreement
with the decision. Investigations into this area are described in the next section.


### 3.5.4 Mechanism of quorum sensing in ants

There have been a number of investigations into the mechanism that enables quorum
sensing in ants, a simple hypothesis is that ants follow a fixed programme of a certain
number of tandem runs, followed by transporting behaviour. However there is evidence
against this hypothesis as the tandem running phase has been observed to be completely
absent in cases of migration over very short distances [79].
In experiments involving the migration behaviour of colonies of the antLeptothorax albipen-
nis[79] the switch from tandem running to transporting was observed to be determined by
the population size at the new nest. Reverse tandem running was also observed, where
an ant would lead another from the new nest back to the old nest. It was suggested that
this was to induce idle workers at the new site to join them in taking items from the old
nest. A potential weakness was identified, that ants from one colony may be transported
to two different sites if two separate groups commence transporting at similar times. It
was indicated that a requirement for a level of quorum, named a quorum threshold, to be
reached before initiating transport would mitigate this possibility. It was concluded that
the entire process allowed a colony to indirectly compare the quality of multiple candidate
nest sites by initially performing the relatively slow process of tandem running, and later
switching to the significantly faster process of transporting at a time determined by the
number of ants at the new site. Evidence was provided against the hypothesis that the
switch from tandem running to transporting was determined by the distance between the
old and new nest; a colony was observed to perform the same number of tandem runs for
a site only ten centimetres away from the old nest as for nests sixty centimetres away.
Further experiments investigated the mechanisms underlying ant nest site selection [78].
An apparatus which enabled the experimenter to grant and restrict access to a new nest at
will allowed the experimenter to separate ants arriving at the nest from any ants currently
evaluating it. The experimenter could therefore determine the importance of direct contact
with other ants in contrast with the pheromonal affect of highly populated nests with no
direct contact. They found that ants only transitioned to their transporting behaviour after
having made direct contact with other ants in the process of evaluating the same nest. They
also found that once an ant had begun transporting, it would not continue to evaluate the
criteria for quorum. This was achieved by manually removing the ants from nests where
transporting had begun and observing that ants would remain transporting when the


new nest contained many fewer other ants that would be required to initiate transporting
an individual ant. It was observed that the time an ant which has begun transporting
spends at a candidate nest drops from two to one minutes, also indicating that it has ceased
performing a certain action. To test the hypothesis that quorum sensing was based on the
absolute number of ants evaluating a nest, the time before ants begun transporting was
compared in two cases with nests of different size. An equal number of ants evaluating
two nests of different sizes would lead to a lower rate of direct contact in the larger nest
than in the smaller nest due to a lower population density. The ants were seen to reach
quorum sooner at the smaller nest hence encounter rate, not the absolute number of ants
at a candidate nest, was predictive of quorum sensing [78]. The experimental evidence
collected supported two hypotheses for the mechanism of quorum sensing both founded
on direct contact with other ants at a candidate nest side. First, average encounter rate,
which hypothesised that an ant would sense quorum when the average rate at which they
encountered other ants at a candidate nest was required to be over a certain threshold.
Second, time for initial contact, which hypothesised that an ant would sense quorum
when the average time before their first direct contact with another ant after arriving at a
candidate nest was below a certain threshold. Neither hypothesis was determined to be
superior to the other, though they are closely linked as any nest with a higher encounter
rate would, on average, lead to shorter times before the first encounter.

#### 3.5.4.1 Selection of quorum threshold in ants

Further experiments observing ant migration manipulated the size of the migrating colony.
The quorum threshold was observed to be proportional to the number of ants in the
colony [20]. When a large colony of ants was artificially split into two, the individual ants
were observed to adopt a proportionately reduced quorum threshold, it was hypothesised
that this adaptation may be achieved by comparing interaction rates at the new and old
nests [20]. Comparison with natural colonies showed that colony size was not the only
factor for the selection of a quorum threshold, age could be relevant for example, as well as
level of experience of the scouts.
Similar experiments induced migration under various conditions. The emigration be-
haviour of a nest was compared under benign conditions and harsh conditions. Ants
were observed to sense quorum and hence select a new nest site more quickly, and with


less discrimination, in harsh conditions than in benign ones. In this context benign condi-
tions had still air and an enclosed nest with adequate humidity and harsh conditions had
high wind and an exposed nest with poor humidity. It was shown that a lower quorum
threshold determined whether a decision would be taken quickly at the risk of selecting
a suboptimal solution, or accurately, at the cost of a more lengthy search process [27, 29].
This showed that the quorum threshold can modulate behaviour depending on the current
circumstances.

### 3.5.5 Mechanism of quorum sensing in bees

```
In the previously described experiment involving bee migrations (Section 3.5.2) the mecha-
nism of quorum sensing was described in two stages. First individual bees needed to sense
that quorum had been reached and second a signal needed to reach the entire colony to
induce migration as a swarm.
```
The experiment compared the time for sensing quorum when evaluating nest sites of equal
quality, but at which different numbers of other bees were present. The method by which
this was achieved was to compare the speed at which quorum was sensed for a nest of a
certain quality and compare it to the speed in a situation where five nests of equal quality
were located close together but at such a distance from the swarm that the accuracy of
the waggle dance was insufficient to unambiguously indicate a single nest. In this sense a
bee indicating a candidate nest site was effectively indicating five sites, from which one
would be randomly selected by any bee attempting to locate the indicated nest. As the
nests were all of equal quality the recruitment process continued as normal but as the bees
were spread randomly across five nests, the population at each nest was on average one
fifth of its size. The swarm were observed to take significantly longer before swarming to
the location of the new nest in the case with five nests than in the case with just one.

Two important observations were drawn from this experiment. Firstly that the size of
the population at the candidate nests is important, and secondly the distinction between
quorum and consensus. Where consensus requires that all hypotheses held by a population
are in agreement, quorum requires that a single hypothesis is held by a certain threshold
number of the population. This experiment showed that consensus was neither necessary
or sufficient for a colony to swarm to a candidate location. It was not sufficient as in the


```
case where there were multiple nests of identical quality, all waggle dances would have
indicated the same location, yet in this case the colony did not swarm to the new nest site
until a sufficient population had gathered at one of the sites. It was not even necessary
as the requirement for the population at a candidate nest site to reach a threshold is not
contingent on there being no bees indicating other sites.
```
There are a number of mechanisms by which bees could detect the population level at a nest
site. Visual perception is a possibility as bees may be able to spot other bees on the surface
of a nest site and near the entrance so long as the light level is sufficient. Alternatively, bees
may use direct contact as do ants as bees are seen frequently coming into contact with each
other during the process of evaluating a nest site. There may also be olfactory cues, and
while this has not been tested for directly it would be analogous to observations of ants
utilising pheromones.
Once individual bees had sensed quorum, they would begin to induce the migratory
behaviour in the colony with an activity called worker piping. Worker piping is described
as ‘the prepare-for-takeoff signal‘ [96], worker bees will perform this vibrational signal
while running over and through the bees inhabiting the outer edge of the nest known as
the mantle. Piping has a stimulatory effect on a shivering behaviour which leads to an
increase in the temperature at the mantle. The mantle is usually cooler than the core so
an increase in temperature at the mantle leads to a uniformity of temperature through the
nest. Once a sufficient uniform temperature has been achieved the colony will swarm to a
location previously encountered by the scout bees.

### 3.5.6 Mechanism of quorum sensing in bacteria

Some bacteria use quorum sensing as mechanism for regulating gene expression and others
use it to coordinate a bioluminescent behaviour, ensuring that the appropriate behaviour is
performed by the population in unison [55]. The unison action is important for bacteria
as their behaviour, if individually expressed, is often too little to be of any value. In the
example of bioluminescence a single bacterium will emit very little light but an entire
population fluorescing at once may emit enough light to enable a host organism to hunt
more effectively, as is the case with the splitfin flashlightfishAnomalops katoptron[36],
or to camouflage the host organism, as with the bobtail squidEuprymna scolopes[39].


The bacteria,vibrio fischeri, which colonise the light organ of the bobtail squid use two
quorum sensing systems [47], both are characterised by the secretion of signal molecules
by individuals. The frequency with which individuals encounter the signal molecules is an
effective proxy for the density of the bacteria population. Under low population density
the production of the luminescence signal molecule is suppressed by a negative modulator,
minimising any energy being expended on bioluminescence before it is beneficial to the
population. Under a medium population density, achieved when the bacteria are attached
to the mucus secreted by the light organ of a bobtail squid, a second signal molecule will
induce colonisation behaviour, where the bacteria expend energy moving into the light
organ itself in an attempt to locate and colonise ‘crypts’. Once colonisation behaviour
has been successful, the population density inside a crypt is much larger than outside the
organ. The higher population density means that a second effect of the colonisation signal
molecule becomes significant, it suppresses the production of the negative modulator,
effectively stimulating the production of the luminescence signal molecule. A sufficient
density of the luminescence signal molecule therefore suggests that colonisation has been
successful and that producing light will now be beneficial use of energy.

These two mechanisms show that by the simple method of detecting the presence of a
molecule it is possible to effectively detect a related occurrence, which in this case is the
presence of a certain population density. Furthermore, detecting subsequent molecules are
indicative of very specific occurrences which in this case is the individuals location within
a crypt. It is significant that as the second system requires a population density that is not
achieved outside of very specific circumstances that even such a single ‘bit’ of information,
that the presence of a molecule is greater than a given threshold, can be taken as a rich
message about the state of the world of a bacterium, namely that the successful colonisation
of a light organ. This is an indication how, the simple ‘boolean’ signals between members
of any swarm can provide valuable information to an individual as long as the signals
are restricted to only being active in specific situations meaningful to the individual. Put
another way, the bacteria do not ‘need to know’ that they have colonised the light organ of a
flashlightfish, they simply detect that a situation has occurred in which a specific behaviour
may be expressed. It is also worth noting that one of the effects of quorum sensing is
to stimulate a behaviour, not by direct induction, but by suppressing the secretion of an
inhibitor. While it is true that in the domain of logic a negated false value is equivalent to a
true value, in nature there may be reasons why one behaviour is preferred over another,


```
this may also simply be a result of the stochastic nature of evolution.
```
#### 3.5.7 Comparisons betweenSDSand quorum sensing in nature

There are some analogues withSDSand the mechanisms of quorum sensing observed in
ants, bees and bacteria. Direct contact between ants and bees has been identified as critical
in the quorum sensing process, in the terms ofSDStwo ants encountering each other at
their candidate nest site is analogous to one agent polling another agent with the same
hypothesis. One mode of diffusion which depends on two agents maintaining the same
hypothesis is context-sensitive diffusion (DCONTEXT-SENSITIVE, algorithm 21) the resulting
behaviour is that one agent becomes inactive and hence may change their hypothesis, this
is superficially analogous to one ant in a candidate nest site encountering another ant and
leading it back to the original nest, though it is no evidence that the either ant changes their
behaviour as a result.
It has been determined that the distance between candidate nests and the original nest did
not directly influence the mechanism of quorum sensing, as the same number of tandem
runs were observed between candidate nest sites of difference distances from the original
nest. Initially this appears to be analogous to the behaviour ofSDSas the evaluation
hypotheses is not affected by the position of the hypothesis in the search space. However,
it should be noted that tandem running is a relatively slow process and so any number
of tandem runs over a longer distance will take longer than the same number of tandem
runs over a shorter distance. The closest analogy to this inSDSwould be in the situation
where parallel iteration is employed and certain hypotheses took much longer to partially
evaluate than others, in this case clusters would still form at various hypotheses after the
same number of evaluations, but one hypothesis may form a cluster sooner due to the
evaluations being quicker.

The closest analogue betweenSDSand quorum sensing is its mode of halting as both
are mechanisms whereby the search procedure yields its result. Quorum sensing can
be interpreted as mode of halting enacted by the individuals which make up a swarm.
The mechanisms of natural quorum sensing described above are all guided by the level
of population at a candidate nest site, or in the case of bacteria, in the local area. These
mechanisms are related to some mode of halting methods described in section 3.4.5, p.106.


In the simplest sense, population at a candidate nest site may be modelled by global activity
threshold halting (HACTIVITY, algorithm 28) but this considers all activity to be pertaining to
the same hypothesis. A better model is largest cluster size halting (HLARGEST, algorithm 27)
as population at a single candidate nest site is therefore modelled as the size of a cluster at
a single hypothesis. This variant is not a good model of observed behaviour on its own as
the ants or bees were not observed to immediately change their behaviour once a sufficient
population had been detected. Another variant which also models some of the behaviour
of natural quorum sensing is stable global activity halting (HSTABLE, algorithm 31) as this
method requires that a hypothesis forms a stable cluster, and that the cluster remains
stable for a given number of iterations. This halting method is therefore analogous to the
behaviour of an ant or a bee requiring that their candidate nest site has a sufficiently high
population for a number of visits before they switch behaviour. This variant is also not a
good model of observed behaviour on its own as an instance of zero, or very low, global
activity is considered stable, but represents a situation which would not induce migration
in ants or bees. The closest model to natural quorum sensing of the variants described in
section 3.4.5 would therefore be a combination of both algorithms, so both requirements
would be modelled. Those being a sufficiently high population which is stable over time.
This variant may be denoted asHAND(HLARGEST,HSTABLE)

The most significant difference between mode of halting and quorum sensing in nature
is that the quorum sensing is an action that results from the interaction of individuals,
whereas each variant of mode of halting results from an analysis of the state of the entire
swarm. Rather than being enabled by the individuals of the swarm, it is a separate process,
outside of the swarm. As such, certain aspects of individual behaviour are not represented
inSDS. There is no time when an agent inSDSswitch into a new behaviour, or modify their
internal state so as to be more or less likely to switch into the behaviour in the future. These
aspects of quorum sensing will be added into a variant ofSDSand explored in the next
chapter.



